Poor gut health may manifest as fatigue, upset stomach, skin conditions, and autoimmune challenges. Probiotics, fermented foods, hydration, and stress management can help.

What is the gut microbiome and why is it important?
The term “gut microbiome” refers to the microorganisms living in your intestines. Each person has about 200 different speciesTrusted Source of bacteria, viruses, and fungi in their digestive tract.

Some microorganisms are harmful to our health, but many are incredibly beneficial and even necessary for a healthy body.

ResearchTrusted Source indicates that having a large variety of bacteria in the gut may help reduce the risk of conditions like:

diabetes
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
psoriatic arthritis

How does the gut microbiome affect your health?
The incredible complexity of the gut and its importance to our overall health is a topic of increasing research in the medical community.

ResearchTrusted Source over the past few decades has found links between gut health and:

mental health disorders
autoimmune diseases
endocrine conditions
gastrointestinal disorders
cardiovascular disease
cancer
A higher level of diversity in gut bacteria may be associated with improved general mental and physical health.

7 signs of an unhealthy gut
Many parts of modern life can affect your gut microbiome, including:

high stress levels
too little sleep
eating a Western diet high in processed and sugary foods
taking antibiotics
This in turn may affect other aspects of your health, such as:

immune function
hormone levels
weight
development of diseases
You may notice a few symptoms if you have reduced gut health. Here are seven of the most common signs:

1. Upset stomach
Stomach disturbances can all be signs of an unhealthy gut. They include:

gas
bloating
constipation
diarrhea
heartburn
A balanced gut will have less difficulty processing food and eliminating waste, likely leading to fewer symptoms.

2. A high-sugar diet
A diet high in processed foods and added sugars can decrease the amount of “good” bacteria and diversity in your gut.

ResearchTrusted Source suggests that eating too much sugar may lead to increased inflammation throughout the body. Inflammation can be the precursor to several diseases, including cancer.

If you eat high amounts of sugar, your gut health may be compromised.

3. Unintentional weight changes
Gaining or losing weight without changing your diet or exercise habits may be a sign of an unhealthy gut. An imbalanced gut can impair your body’s ability to absorb nutrients, regulate blood sugar, and store fat.

Weight loss may be caused by malabsorption because of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO). On the other hand, weight gain may be caused by insulin resistance or increased inflammation.

4. Sleep disturbances or constant fatigue
ResearchTrusted Source indicates that an imbalance in gut bacteria may be linked to fragmented sleep and short sleep duration, which may lead to chronic fatigue.

While the cause remains unclearTrusted Source, it appears to be connected to inflammation, metabolic function, and mental health.

5. Skin irritation
Skin conditions like psoriasis may be related to the types of bacteria present in the gut. Lower concentrations of beneficial bacteria may impact the body’s immune system and your skin health.

6. Autoimmune conditions
Many studies have found connections between the gut and the immune system.

An unhealthy gut may increase systemic inflammation and alter the proper functioning of the immune system. This may lead to autoimmune diseases, where the body attacks itself mistaking its cells and organs for harmful invaders.

7. Food intolerances
Food intolerances are the result of difficulty digesting certain foods. This is different than a food allergy, which is caused by an immune system reaction to certain foods.

Research indicates that food intolerances, like lactose intolerance, may be caused by poor quality of bacteria in the gut. This can lead to trouble digesting the trigger foods and symptoms like:

bloating
gas
diarrhea
abdominal pain
nausea
There is also some research indicating that food allergies may be related to gut health.

7 things you can do for your gut health
You may be able to improve and reset your gut health through lifestyle and diet changes. Consider trying one or more of the following to improve your gut health naturally:

1. Lower your stress levels
Chronic high levels of stress are hard on your whole body, including your gut. This is because your body releases certain hormones when it experiences stress. High levels of these hormones affect your body and may compromise gut health.

A few ways to lower stress may include:

meditating
walking
getting a massage
spending time with friends or family
diffusing essential oils
limiting alcohol intake
laughing
practicing yoga
spending time with a pet
2. Get enough sleep
Not getting enough or sufficient quality of sleep may have serious impacts on your gut health, which can in turn contribute to more sleep issues.

Try to prioritize getting at least 7–8 hoursTrusted Source of uninterrupted sleep per night. Your doctor may be able to help if you have trouble sleeping.

3. Eat slowly
Chewing your food thoroughly and eating your meals more slowly may lower your chances of developing obesity and diabetes while also helping you make better food choices.

This may help you reduce digestive discomfort and maintain a healthy gut.

4. Stay hydrated
Drinking plenty of water may be linked to increased diversity of bacteria in the gut, though the source of the water also matters.

One 2022 studyTrusted Source also found that people who drank more water had less of a type of bacteria that can cause gastrointestinal infections.

Staying hydrated benefits your health overall and can help prevent constipation. It may also be a simple way to promote a healthy gut.

5. Take a prebiotic or probiotic
While researchTrusted Source is ongoing, adding a prebiotic or probiotic supplement to your diet may help improve your gut health. Prebiotics provide “food” meant to promote the growth of beneficial bacteria in the gut, while probiotics are live good bacteria.

People who have a severe illness or a weakened immune system should not take probiotics. Also, not all probiotic supplements are high quality or beneficial for your health.

It’s best to speak with a healthcare professional when choosing a probiotic or prebiotic supplement to help improve your health.

6. Check for food intolerances
You may have a food intolerance if you have symptoms such as:

bloating
abdominal pain
diarrhea
gas
nausea
fatigue
acid reflux
You can try eliminating common trigger foods to see if your symptoms improve. If you’re able to identify and avoid a food or foods that are contributing to your symptoms, you may see a positive change in your digestive health.

7. Change your diet
Reducing the amount of processed, sugary, and high fat foods that you eat may lead to better gut health.

Eating a diet high in fiber likely contributes to a healthy gut microbiome as well. You may also positively impact your gut by eating foods high in micronutrients called polyphenols present in:

vegetables
fruits
coffee
tea
wine

4 types of food for gut health
Diet and gut health appear to be very closely linked. Avoiding processed foods, high fat foods, and foods high in refined sugars is likely important for maintaining a healthy microbiome, as these foods may promote the growth of damaging bacteria.

You can eat certain foods that actively promote the growth of beneficial bacteria, contributing to your overall health. These superfoods for gut health include:

1. High fiber foods
ResearchTrusted Source indicates that high fiber foods have a positive impact on gut health. These foods include:

legumes, like black beans and chickpeas
whole grains, like oats and quinoa
vegetables, like broccoli and asparagus
nuts, like almonds and pistachios
fruits, like apples and peaches
2. Garlic
According to a 2019 studyTrusted Source in rodents, garlic may increase gut microbiome diversity and improve gut health.

A small 2018 studyTrusted Source of 49 people similarly found that aged garlic extract increased diversity and levels of beneficial bacteria. Still, more research in humans should be done.

3. Fermented foods
Fermented foods are great dietary sources of probiotics. Examples include:

kimchi
sauerkraut
yogurt
kefir
ResearchTrusted Source suggests that consuming these foods may improve the gut microbiome.

4. Collagen-boosting foods
Collagen-rich foods such as bone broth and salmon skin may be beneficial for both overall health and gut health.

A 2021 studyTrusted Source indicated that supplements with collagen may benefit the gut microbiome in mice, though further research is needed.

You could also try to boost your body’s collagen production through your diet. To help your body make collagen, try eating more:

citrus fruits
broccoli
meat
eggs
nuts

Frequently asked questions
Why does the gut microbiome vary in individuals?
The gut microbiome is affected by many factors, including:

diet
environment
antibiotic use
stress
sleep
genetics
Each of these elements varies in different people, influencing their gut microbiomes in different ways. This variation results in individuals having unique gut microbiomes.

How does the gut microbiome respond to fasting?
Fasting seems to benefit the gut microbiome, though more research in humans needs to be done.

According to one small 2019 study of 16 people, fasting was linked to lower levels of a bacteria that promotes colorectal cancer.

Research in animals also shows the benefits of fasting. A 2018 studyTrusted Source in fruit flies found that intermittent fasting appeared to improve gut health and increase lifespan. Another 2019 studyTrusted Source in mice indicated that fasting promoted the growth of beneficial gut bacteria and reduced inflammation in the intestines.

Does eating probiotics actually change your gut microbiome?
Some studies have found no impact of probiotics on the gut microbiome. Still, other researchTrusted Source suggests that probiotics may significantly affect the makeup of the gut microbiome and positively impact other areas of health, like immunity.

Studies are still being done in this area.

How can I improve my gut health?
You can improve your gut health by taking steps to improve your overall health. This can include eating more fiber-rich foods, eating fewer ultra-processed foods, getting enough sleep, and managing your stress levels.

What are the signs of an unhealthy gut?
Some signs of unbalanced gut bacteria can include upset stomach, unintentional weight changes, and fatigue.

Takeaway
The human gut is complex. While research is ongoing, it seems clear that the gut microbiome impacts whole-body health. A healthy gut contributes to:

a strong immune system
heart health
brain health
improved mood
healthy sleep
effective digestion
potential prevention of some cancers and autoimmune diseases
Lifestyle and dietary changes may positively affect not only your gut health but your overall health.

Fish Oil for Kids: The 7 Best Options According to a Dietitian
Key takeaways
Most kids don’t need fish oil supplements, but these can be useful in some cases.
Nordic Naturals Children’s DHA is our top pick because it’s third-party tested, sustainably sourced, and available in two different forms.
Other picks include California Gold Nutrition Kids Omega-3 Fish Oil as the best budget-friendly option and Nordic Naturals Gummy Chews.

A quick look at the best fish oil for kids
Best overall: Nordic Naturals Children’s DHA | Skip to review
A gummy without added sugar: Nordic Naturals Children's DHA Gummy Chews | Skip to review
A good liquid option with more value: California Gold Nutrition Kids Omega-3 Fish Oil | Skip to review
A gummy multivitamin that contains fish oil: NatureMade Kids First Multivitamin + Omega-3 Gummies | Skip to review
Most convenient for kids on the go: Omegavia Kids Omega-3 Gummies | Skip to review
A vegan-friendly liquid option: Garden of Life Kids Plant Omega-3 Liquid | Skip to review
Best for infants when pediatrician recommends: Nordic Naturals Baby's DHA  | Skip to review
Fish oil supplements can be a quick and convenient way to squeeze extra omega-3 fatty acids — including docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) — into your child’s diet to support brain and heart healthTrusted Source.

While most kids can meet their nutritional needs through a balanced diet, fish oil can be useful for picky eaters and those who don’t often eat seafood or other foods high in omega-3.

From liquids to softgels to gummies, there are many different options on the market designed specifically for kids. Keep reading for what you should look for, along with a few of our top picks.

Best overall
Nordic Naturals Children’s DHA

4.5 (10.3k+) from Amazon
Form: liquid or sotgels
EPA: 170 mg
DHA: 255 mg
Recommended age: 1 to 6 years
SHOP NOW AT AMAZON
Healthline's review
Nordic Naturals Children’s DHA is a high quality fish oil supplement for kids. It comes in Strawberry flavor and provides 250 milligrams (mg) of total omega-3 sourced from wild Arctic cod, with 80 mg of EPA and 120 mg of DHA per serving when choosing the softgel form.

It’s available in both softgel and liquid form. Because the recommended dose is 4 softgels daily (which can be chewed), many might prefer the liquid option.

However — hint — the California Gold liquid pick below is about the same price but includes more per bottle and also contains more EPA and DHA if you’re looking for a higher dose. That said, it doesn’t make test results available like Nordic Naturals and does not have any sustainability certifications.

It’s certified sustainable by FOS and third-party tested for purity, with test results available for all products.



Pros & cons

Product details
A gummy without added sugar
Nordic Naturals Children's DHA Gummy Chews
Form: gummies
EPA: 145 mg per serving
DHA: 355 mg per serving
Recommended age: 3 years and older
SHOP NOW AT AMAZON
Healthline's review
If your child prefers gummies over softgels or liquids, consider giving this fish oil from Nordic Naturals a try.

Formulated with 145 mg of EPA and 355 mg of DHA per serving, these tropical punch-flavored gummy chews provide more omega-3 fatty acids than our top pick. However, be mindful that if your kid already consumes omega-3 through their diet, they may not need a higher dose.

These gummies are free from added sugar, sustainably sourced, and made without artificial ingredients.

Like other Nordic Naturals products, they are also third-party tested, with a COA detailing the results available on the company’s website.



Pros & cons

Product details
A good liquid option with more value
California Gold Nutrition Kids Omega-3 Fish Oil
Form: liquid
EPA: 370 mg per serving
DHA: 230 mg per serving
Recommended age: 4+ years
SHOP NOW AT IHERB
Healthline's review
Clocking in at just $0.24 per serving, this supplement from California Gold Nutrition can be an inexpensive way to squeeze omega-3 into your child’s daily diet.

It provides 700 mg of total omega-3s per serving, including 370 mg of EPA and 230 mg of DHA.

Additionally, it’s available in a Natural Lemon flavor and can be taken as is or mixed into drinks or snacks.

This supplement is reportedly third-party tested by iHerb and produced in a facility compliant with current Good Manufacturing Practices (cGMPs) set by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).

Pros: third-party tested, produced in third-party audited facility, cost effective, non-GMO

Cons: only one flavor available, not suitable for those with a soy allergy



Pros & cons

Product details
A gummy multivitamin that contains fish oil
NatureMade Kids First Multivitamin + Omega-3 Gummies
Form: gummies
EPA: 5 mg per serving
DHA: 25 mg per serving
Recommended age: ages 4–18
SHOP NOW AT NATURE MADE
Healthline's review
With nine essential nutrients and 30 mg of combined EPA and DHA per serving, this gummy multivitamin from Nature Made can help streamline your child’s supplement routine.

While it’s not technically a fish oil supplement, it provides 113.5 mg of omega-3s per serving derived from fish oil, along with an assortment of other essential vitamins and minerals.

Each bottle contains three fruity flavors and is suitable for kids ages 4 to 18.

These gummies are also free from artificial flavors and sweeteners, though they contain a small amount of added sugar per serving.

They are verified by United States Pharmacopeia (USP), a third-party organization that helps ensure the quality of dietary supplements through a comprehensive testing and evaluation process.

If your child is vegan or vegetarian, you could also consider Smarty Pants Kids Plus Multi & Omegas instead.



Pros & cons

Product details
Most convenient for kids on the go
Omegavia Kids Omega-3 Gummies
Form: gummies
EPA: 60 mg per serving
DHA: 300 mg per serving
Recommended age: ages 3+
SHOP NOW AT AMAZON
Healthline's review

Omegavia Kids Omega-3 Chewies come individually wrapped, making them a convenient and mess-free option you can simply slip into your child’s lunchbox or backpack each morning.


They’re also free from sugar and naturally flavored, and each serving contains 60 mg of EPA and 300 mg of DHA.


What’s more, they’re 5-star tested by International Fish Oil Standards (IFOS), an independent organization that tests fish oil products for safety, purity, potency, and freshness.


According to the company, this supplement is also manufactured in third-party, audited, and cGMP-compliant facilities within the United States.




Pros & cons

Product details
A vegan-friendly liquid option
Garden of Life Kids Plant Omega-3 Liquid
Form: liquid
EPA: 100 mg per serving
DHA: 265 mg per serving
Recommended age: ages 4+
SHOP NOW AT IHERB
Healthline's review
While fish oil supplements aren’t suitable for vegans or vegetarians, this plant-based option from Garden of Life offers a kid-friendly way to boost omega-3 intake without any animal products.

It’s derived from a blend of algal and flaxseed oils and delivers 880 mg of total omega-3s per serving, including 265 mg of DHA and 100 mg of EPA.

It’s not only non-GMO and certified vegan but also certified gluten-free and made without artificial ingredients.

Like other liquid supplements, it’s also easy to sneak into yogurt, smoothies, oatmeal, or juice, making it a suitable choice for picky eaters or kids who dislike gummies and softgels.



Pros & cons

Product details
Best for infants when pediatrician recommends
Nordic Naturals Baby's DHA
Form: liquid
EPA: 350 mg per serving
DHA: 485 mg per serving
Recommneded age: babies 5-35 lbs
SHOP NOW AT AMAZON
Healthline's review
Because breast milk and most formulas contain DHA, babies don’t usually need an omega-3 supplement.

However, if your pediatrician has recommended a fish oil supplement for your infant, this supplement is a suitable option to consider.

It contains 1,050 mg of total omega-3 per serving — 350 mg of EPA and 485 mg of DHA. It also contains 7.5 micrograms (mcg) of vitamin D, which is recommended for all babies who are not exclusively formula-fed.

Similar to other supplements from Nordic Naturals, this product is certified sustainable by FOS and third-party tested for freshness and purity.



Pros & cons

Product details

How we chose these fish oil supplements for kids
As we compiled our list of the best fish oil supplements for kids, we considered the following factors:

Nutrients: We selected supplements made with DHA and EPA, the easiest forms of omega-3 fatty acids for your body to use.
Ingredients: We prioritized supplements made with high quality ingredients, which are free from artificial additives, unnecessary fillers, and preservatives.
Quality testing: Many of the supplements on our list have been tested by third-party labs to help ensure purity, safety, and quality.
Online reviews: We read real reviews from parents to determine which fish oil supplements for kids should make the cut.
Vetting: All products on our list have been vetted to ensure they align with Healthline’s brand integrity standards and approach to well-being. You can read more about our vetting process.
What to look for in a fish oil supplement for kids (and what to avoid)
There are several factors you can consider when shopping for a fish oil supplement for your child.

A few of the key points to keep in mind include:

Nutrients: Be sure to check the dose of DHA and EPA provided in your fish oil supplement. Additionally, some omega-3 supplements may also contain other nutrients — such as vitamins A, D, or E — so remember to check the label carefully, especially if your child is taking other vitamins or supplements.
Other ingredients: Steer clear of fish oil supplements that contain artificial ingredients, fillers, or excessive amounts of added sugar. Instead, stick to products low in added sugar with a simple list of ingredients.
Form: Fish oil is available in several forms, including liquids, gummies, and softgels. While liquid may be easier to mix into foods or drinks, some children and parents may prefer the taste or convenience of gummies and softgels instead.
Source: Omega-3 supplements are typically derived from fatty fish, krill, cod liver, or algae. Consider your child’s dietary requirements and personal preferences to determine which is right for you.
Testing: Ideally, opt for supplements that are tested or certified by an independent organization for safety and quality. This can help ensure that your fish oil is free from harmful contaminants or heavy metals, such as mercury.
Cost: Fish oil supplements are available at a wide range of price points. Be sure to keep your budget in mind and remember that a higher price tag doesn’t always translate to a higher quality product.
The benefits of fish oil for kids
Fish oil supplements can be an easy way to help boost your child’s intake of omega-3 fatty acids, especially if seafood isn’t a regular part of their meal plan.

It may also be linked to a few possible health perks, including for the following:

May support brain health: Omega-3 fatty acids play a key role in brain development during childhood and adolescence and have been tied to several benefits, especially related to attention, memory, executive function, and communication.
May aid sleep: Research suggests that omega-3 fatty acids could reduceTrusted Source sleep disturbances and improve other aspects of sleep health during childhood.
Possible benefits for asthma: One study found that getting enough omega-3 fatty acids in the diet may actually be linked to a lower riskTrusted Source of asthma in children and adolescents.
However, keep in mind that fish oil supplements are not necessary for all children, especially if they regularly consume foods rich in omega-3, such as fatty fish.

Who should not take fish oil?
Not all kids need fish oil, especially if they’re following a balanced diet and eating seafood on a regular basis. In fact, taking high doses of fish oil could causeTrusted Source unpleasant side effects like heartburn, nausea, and diarrhea.

Children who are allergic to fish or shellfish also need to avoid fish oil. If needed, they can opt for omega-3 supplements from other sources instead, such as algal oil.

If your child is taking any medications or other supplements, it’s also a good idea to check in with your pediatrician before adding fish oil to the mix.

Additionally, keep in mind that certain types of omega-3 supplements may contain high amounts of nutrients commonly found in multivitamins — like vitamin ATrusted Source or vitamin ETrusted Source — which can be harmful if consumed in excess.

Fish oil for ADHD
Omega-3 fatty acids have been studied for their ability to support brain health and improve symptoms of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in children. However, research has turned up mixed results on their effectiveness.

For example, one study in 60 children with ADHD found that supplementing with 550 mg of EPA and 225 mg of DHA per day for 8 weeks could be tiedTrusted Source to less impulsive behavior.

Another 12-week study in 92 adolescents concludedTrusted Source that 1.2 grams of EPA per day could improve cognitive (thinking ability) symptoms in children and teens with ADHD, especially for those with low blood levels of EPA at baseline. On the other hand, researchers note that those with high levels of EPA could actually be negatively affected.

Other studies suggest that there may be a link between EPA deficiency and the severity of ADHD symptoms.

That being said, one review of 37 trials concludedTrusted Source that polyunsaturated fatty acids (including omega-3s) had no significant effect on parent-rated inattention, hyperactivity, impulsivity, or overall ADHD symptoms in children compared to a placebo.

A 2023 meta-analysis also found that omega-3 supplementation does not improveTrusted Source ADHD symptoms but could offer other long-term benefits.

Therefore, while omega-3 fatty acids can benefit brain health, it’s still a good idea to check in with your pediatrician before using fish oil to help manage symptoms of ADHD.

Frequently asked questions about fish oil for kids

Do kids really need fish oil?
No. According to the National Institutes of Health (NIH), most children in the United States consume the recommended amount of omega-3 in the form of alpha-linolenic acid (ALA).

However, fish oil supplements can be a quick and convenient way to bump up intake for picky eaters or those who don’t regularly eat foods rich in omega-3.


What is the right age to start taking fish oil?
There’s no set age for starting supplementation. In fact, fish oil supplements are available for all ages, from infants to adults.

A pediatrician can provide personalized guidance on whether a fish oil supplement may be necessary for your child and offer recommendations on an appropriate dosage and form.


What are the side effects of taking fish oil?
Fish oil can cause several side effects, but they are generally very mild. Possible side effects of fish oil supplements include an unpleasant taste, bad breath, headache, and digestive issues like heartburn, diarrhea, or nausea.


How much fish oil for ADHD kids?
One small study found that 550 mg of EPA and 225 mg of DHA were associated with decreased impulsive behavior in children. Meanwhile, another study found that taking 1.2 g of EPA alone could improve cognitive symptoms.

However, research is mixed on the use of fish oil for ADHD, and some other studies have found no benefit of supplementation for reducing symptoms of ADHD.

The takeaway
Most children can meet their nutritional needs by following a balanced diet and don’t need supplementation.

However, fish oil supplements can be a simple way to boost your child’s intake of omega-3 fatty acids if needed. They may be especially useful for picky eaters and those who aren’t getting enough foods rich in omega-3s in their diet.

Be sure to check with your child’s pediatrician before trying any new supplement. They can provide guidance on an appropriate dosage and make personalized recommendations based on your child’s needs.

The Best L-Glutamine Supplements 2025

On this page
Key takeaways
L-glutamine supplements may support health when the body is not producing adequate amounts, such as during illness or injury.
Supplements typically provide around 200 milligrams (mg) to 1,000 mg of L-glutamine per serving.
Our top choices for L-glutamine supplements are Thorne for quality and Nutricost for taste and affordability.



A quick look at the best L-glutamine supplements
Best overall: Thorne L-Glutamine | Skip to review
Best for taste: Nutricost L-Glutamine Powder | Skip to review
Most affordable: Double Wood L-Glutamine Supplement | Skip to review
Best with BCAA: Designs for Health BCAA Powder with L-Glutamine | Skip to review

Our top picks for L-glutamine supplements
Best overall
Thorne L-Glutamine
Form: capsule
Number of servings: 90
L-glutamine per serving: 500 mg
*Price may vary.

Healthline's review
Why we chose it: Thorne is a well-established supplement brand that tops our list of best vitamin brands for its commitment to quality.

Many Thorne supplements are NSF certified, meaning they have undergone independent testing for safety and purity.

Each serving provides 500 mg of L-glutamine, the typical dose for most L-glutamine supplements. Thorne recommends taking 1 capsule up to three times daily, for a maximum dose of 1,500 mg.

Capsules offer a convenient, mess-free way to take pre-dosed supplements. It may suit beginners or people on the go.

Thorne has a range of supplements that are NSF Certified for Sport, meaning they are approved as safe for professional athletes. This range includes the powder version of its L-glutamine supplement.

The powder supplement is available in a 504-gram tub that provides 90 servings, like the capsule version. However, the cost per serving is much higher than the other pure L-glutamine powders in this roundup.

The L-glutamine capsules are free from dairy, gluten, and soy. Thorne uses third-party certified facilities to manufacture its supplements.

Read our in-depth Thorne review.



Pros & cons

Product details
Best for taste
Nutricost L-Glutamine Powder
Form: powder
Number of servings: 50
L-glutamine per serving: 500 mg
SHOP NOW AT NUTRICOST
Healthline's review
Why we chose it: This L-glutamine powder is available in a wide range of flavors, which may suit people who don’t like unflavored supplement drinks.

Nutricost offers its L-glutamine powder in three sizes: 250 g, 500 g, or 1 kilogram (kg). The 1 kg version provides 200 servings, and the price per serving is $0.16. For people looking to bulk buy L-glutamine, this is one of the most affordable options available.

Nutricost’s L-glutamine is available in a wide range of flavors:

Unflavored
Blue Raspberry
Fruit Punch
Peach Mango
Green Apple
Blackberry Lemonade
All Nutricost supplements are manufactured in a facility registered with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The facility also complies with current good manufacturing practices (CGMPs). The powder is vegetarian-friendly and free from gluten, soy, and GMOs.



Pros & cons

Product details
Most affordable
Double Wood L-Glutamine Supplement
Form: capsule
Number of servings: 60
L-glutamine per serving: 1,000 mg
*Price may vary.

Healthline's review
Why we chose it: Double Wood offers affordable, third-party-tested supplements with certificates of analysis (COAs) available online. Double Wood uses a cCGMP certified facility.

Double Woods offers L-glutamine supplements in both powder and capsule form. Both provide 500 mg L-glutamine per serving. The powder version comes in a 500 g tub with 100 servings. It is much lower cost than Thorne’s L-glutamine powder.

The recommended serving size is two capsules, providing 1,000 mg of L-glutamine. Though the dose per serving is higher than Thorne’s, the dose per capsule is the same at 500 mg.

These vegan supplements are free from gluten and GMOs.

This is a suitable choice if you want an L-glutamine supplement with a low upfront cost.

Read our in-depth review of Double Wood supplements.



Pros & cons

Product details
Best with BCAA
Designs for Health BCAA Powder with L-Glutamine
Form: powder
Number of servings: 30 per container
SHOP NOW AT AMAZON
Healthline's review
Why we chose it: This powder from Designs for Health combines branch-chain amino acids (BCAAs) with L-glutamine, which may enhance their potential benefits.

BCAA combines three essential amino acids: leucine, isoleucine, and valine.

Popular with athletes, BCAA supplements may help improve performance and reduce muscle fatigue. Other proven benefits include improved muscle growth and decreased muscle wastage.

This vegetarian supplement is free from gluten and GMOs. It contains stevia as a sweetener and has an orange flavor.

Designs for Health is cGMP certified. Its supplements undergo third-party testing at an ISO 17025 laboratory to confirm purity and potency. A COA is also available to customers upon request.

Find out Healthline’s favorite BCAA supplements.

BCAA supplements are unsuitable for those who are pregnant, nursing, or have maple syrup urine disease.



Pros & cons

Product details
Comparing the best L-glutamine supplements
Price	Form	Dose per serving	(Total servings)	Price per serving
Thorne	$24,
$63	capsule,
powder	500 mg	90	$0.26,
$0.70
Nutricost	$17.97 to $32.97	powder	500 mg	50 to 200	$0.16 to $0.35
Double Wood	$14.95, $24.95	capsule, powder	1,000 mg	60,
100	$0.24
Designs for Health	$69.99	powder	200 mg	30	$2.25
How we chose the best L-glutamine supplements
All supplements we feature on Healthline have passed our rigorous vetting criteria, which evaluates brands and products for quality, health claims, certifications, and more.

»MORE:How we evaluate vitamins, minerals, and supplements.
To select the best L-glutamine supplements, we considered the following:

Testing: We prioritize brands that put their products through independent, third-party testing to establish purity and potency.
Ingredients: We look for brands that use high quality ingredients and limit or avoid artificial flavors, fillers, and preservatives.
Certifications: We looked for brands that offer products with additional certifications from third-party organizations, such as NSF.
Reputation: We choose brands approved by our nutrition experts and with positive customer reviews.
Price: We select products that suit various budgets while providing good value.
Why Trust Healthline
1320+
vitamins, minerals, and supplements evaluated
95+
vitamins, minerals, and supplements personally tested
40+
vitamin, mineral, and supplement brands personally tested
How we evaluate vitamins, minerals, and supplements
Our Medical Standards and Insights team has carefully researched and vetted over 11,000 products and services. We fact-check health claims, evaluate ingredients, and look into each brand’s reputation before sharing products and services on Healthline.

To choose the brands on this page, we considered all the vitamin brands that passed our vetting process. Then, we personally tested some of them to narrow down our list even further.

Why take L-glutamine supplements?
L-glutamine is an amino acid that is important for various bodily functions. It is sometimes referred to as simply glutamine, though this has a different structure than L-glutamine.

The body needs essential and nonessential amino acids to create various proteins. A nonessential amino acid, like L-glutamine, is a protein the body can produce itself, so a person does not need to get it from food.

Most people with no health issues do not require L-glutamine supplementation. However, some may benefit from L-glutamine supplements when their body’s reserves are low. Deficiencies may occur when the body is experiencing strain on glutamine supplies, such as during illness or injury, or after strenuous exercise.

Current research suggests that L-glutamine benefits may include supporting muscle growth and recovery after exercise, managing gastrointestinal conditions, and supporting immune system function.

Just a few studies showing the benefits of L-glutamine supplementation are listed below:

Athletic performance and recovery: A 2024 study found that taking L-glutamine after intensive combat sports training improved hormone levels, mood, and resistance to respiratory infections. A 2020 study among older adults in an exercise program experienced greater health benefits when taking L-glutamine supplements.
Gastrointestinal health: A 2024 review notes that, though further research is necessary, clinical studies have found leaky supplementation beneficial for managing leaky gut syndrome and improving intestinal permeability in conditions such as Crohn’s disease and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). A 2021 study suggests that, in combination with a low FODMAP diet, L-glutamine supplementation may help manage IBS symptoms.
Weight: A 2019 study in rats indicated that glutamine supplements may help manage overweight and obesity. A 2019 meta-analysis of clinical trials concluded that, although glutamine supplementation did not improve athletic aerobic performance or body composition, it did lead to improved weight reduction.
Treatment applications: A 2020 study found that L-glutamine supplementation may help prevent the onset and progression of atrial fibrillation. A 2024 study supports that L-glutamine supplementation effectively manages sickle cell disease complications.
While L-glutamine supplementation has many proven uses, most people with no health issues will not need to take it, as their bodies should produce enough.

Those considering taking L-glutamine on a regular basis need to consult a healthcare professional first, particularly if they have existing conditions or are taking any medication.

Frequently asked questions about L-glutamine supplements

Which brand of L-glutamine is best?
Our pick for the best L-glutamine brand is Thorne, due to the company’s commitment to research and quality.

Thorne offers L-glutamine supplements in capsule or powder form, providing 500 mg of L-glutamine per serving.

 


What is the best form to take L-glutamine?
L-glutamine supplements are typically available in powder or capsule forms.

Little research is available to conclude that any form is best. However, many people opt for powder supplements as it may be more readily absorbed in the body.


What happens if I take L-glutamine everyday?
Taking L-glutamine daily may offer some health benefits, such as improved exercise performance and recovery, management of gastrointestinal health, and support of immune function.

However, most healthy people do not require L-glutamine supplements as the body should produce adequate supplies.

Speak with a healthcare professional to determine if L-glutamine supplementation is safe and worthwhile for your health goals.

Takeaway
While most people do not need to take L-glutamine, some can benefit from a supplement. Many options are available if you are at risk of an L-glutamine deficiency due to exercise, injury, or illness.

Thorne and Double Wood are our top picks for L-glutamine supplements, based on quality, affordability, and safety.
L-glutamine supplements may support athletic performance and recovery, gastrointestinal health, weight management, and more. If you have concerns about L-glutamine deficiency, speak to a healthcare professional.

Say ‘Sup’ to Healthline’s Vitamin and Supplement Testers
Types of supplement testers
Past testers
Healthline’s team of supplement testers ranges from vitamin newbies to aficionados. They’ve tried scores of products from top brands.

Every

Every vitamin and mineral supplement you see on Healthline has undergone a strict vetting process with our Medical Standards and Insights team.

Our editors then carefully select the best options before they reach our testers, who apply the same level of scrutiny in their reviews.

Our testers deliver thorough, honest, and helpful feedback for all supplements they test.

Over the years, we’ve reviewed dozens of supplements from top brands, choosing the best vitamins and minerals for a variety of people and health goals.

We’ve tested everything from collagen to supplements for stress, iron to personalized vitamins, and much more.

»Learn about our comprehensive process for reviewing supplements.
Types of supplement testers
Expert testers | Skip to meet them: Our expert supplement testers are registered dietitians. They’re able to provide insights on what makes a high-quality supplement, and which options might be best for different needs.
Supertesters | Skip to meet them: Our supertesters have tested at least 10 different vitamins or supplements for Healthline.
Everyday testers | Skip to meet them: Our everyday testers have tested less than 10 supplements or vitamins for Healthline.
Expert testers

Registered dietitians

Supertesters

Have tried 10+ products

Everyday testers

Have tried less than 10 products


Supplement supertesters
Catherine Conelly
Types of supplements tested: prenatals, multivitamins, omega oils, electrolytes, magnesium, and vitamin D
Health focus: pregnancy, postpartum, and breastfeeding
I’m a fan of trying to regulate my body a bit more naturally (even though, yes, I know some vitamins are synthetic). I appreciate that vitamins and supplements can help me proactively manage my overall health and support common needs like deeper sleep, nutrient intake, gut health, and, for my current phase of life, breastfeeding.

As long as there are no high risks or safety concerns (I like to read up on recent studies and expert opinions first), I keep an open mind to natural remedies and wellness trends as a way to stay healthy and energetic. With two kids and a full-time job, it’s a must.

I’ve mainly used magnesium, multivitamins, protein powder, greens and superfood powders, omega-3s, electrolytes, and prenatals.

»Check out Catherine’s review of Ritual in our roundup of the best prenatal vitamins.
Kristin Currin
Types of supplements tested: multivitamins, probiotics, fish oils, greens powders, turmeric, and vitamin D
Health focus: gut health, anxiety, focus, energy, inflammation
I’m a supplement enthusiast who moonlighted for several years as the vitamin and supplement expert on said aisle at a whole-food grocery.

Several notable brands invited me to workshops to learn about their processes. I geek out on understanding what works in harmony with our bodies.

Personally, I’m also passionate about supplements since I manage chronic neck pain (fibromyalgia) and inflammation, and I’ve had to advocate for my health with specialists.

»Read Kristin’s reviews in our roundup of the best vitamin brands.
Chelsea Logan
Types of supplements tested: protein powders, iron supplements, omega oils, and multivitamins
Health focus: vegan nutrition, energy and stamina, overall wellness
I have a chronic iron deficiency, so I’ve been taking iron supplements regularly for the past 20 years or so. Currently, I’m rounding out my daily routine with a multivitamin that contains vitamin D and B12 (both vitamins I tend to be low in as a vegan) as well as a plant-based omega supplement. I also regularly consume protein powder.

When shopping for a new supplement, I look for ones that are vegan and third-party tested. After that, I tend to prioritize those that are packaged sustainably. Future Kind checks all my boxes, so I’m a big fan of their products. I also like Naked Nutrition and Garden of Life.

»Check out Chelsea’s reviews in our roundup of the best vegan protein powders.
Supplement everyday testers
Alice Porter-McLaughlin
Types of supplements tested: probiotics, multivitamins, protein powders, greens powders, and omega oils
Health focus: vegan nutrition, breastfeeding, fitness, gut health, brain health
As a vegan for over 15 years and now a busy breastfeeding mom, my main goals with vitamins are bridging nutritional gaps and supporting my energy levels.

I take daily multivitamins geared toward vegan nutrition and lactation, probiotics to support gut health and immune function, and plant-based omega-3 fatty acids for skin, brain, and eye health.

I aim to use supplements alongside a balanced diet and value the reassurance they offer. I occasionally have greens and superfood powders when I need a nutritional boost.

I generally prefer brands that are committed to quality, purity, and simplicity in their ingredients. I look for organic certification and no synthetic or unnecessary additives. I also consider research-backed formulas, so brands like Thorne, AG1, and FullWell stand out for me.

I’m also interested and open-minded about natural and alternative supplements if they’re proven safe and worthwhile.

»Check out Alice’s take on Garden of Life in our roundup of the best probiotics for women.
Rita Mauceri
Types of supplements tested: multivitamins for women over 50, probiotics, supplements for hair growth, omega-3 supplements, and 5-HTP
Health focus: energy, sleep, stress reduction, gut health, menopausal wellness
I’ve tried lots of supplements, but I don’t go overboard. I tend to use them for specific reasons. I eat a really well-rounded, protein-rich diet that provides most of my essential nutrients, but I also love the convenience and reassurance of taking supplements. I’ve found some that work really well for me, and allow me to target some things that have become more important as I age like brain and bone health.

My daily musts are vitamin D3+K2, B-12, cod liver oil, and red yeast rice because I have high cholesterol. I sometimes take probiotics and 5-HTP. I want to try glutathione and adaptogens.

I don’t love taking pills, especially large ones. If a liquid or powder form is available, I will opt for that over adding more pills to my regimen. I also don’t think supplements have to be pricey, so for things like vitamin D or B vitamins, which come at different price points, I tend to go the more affordable route.

»Check out Rita’s review of Thorne in our roundup of the best multivitamins for women over 50.
Jackie Cruz
Types of supplements tested: creatine, preworkout, and protein powder
Health focus: general wellness, exercise performance, athletic performance, muscle growth, muscle recovery, and brain function
In my daily routine, I take AG1 multivitamin powder every morning along with the vitamin D and K drops it comes with. I work out from 7 to 8:30 a.m., and then I take creatine as soon as I get home and get ready to walk my dog. In the evening, I drink a Liquid IV with dinner and take a vitamin B12 supplement.

In terms of favorite brands, I typically look for what is cheap and does not contain heavy metals, although that’s very hard to find.

As an aging, high-performance athlete, I take creatine every day to aid with muscle recovery and growth. I find it boosts my energy levels and endurance. From what I’ve researched, it takes at least one year of taking it every day to see results in cognitive function. Occasionally, I use a pre-workout supplement during a tournament if I feel like my energy levels are dropping and caffeine alone isn’t helping.

»Read Jackie’s take on Nutricost creatine.
Heather Riesebeck
Types of supplements tested: women’s multivitamins and protein powders
Health focus: vitamin D & B12 deficiencies, mood & energy boost
When looking for multivitamins, it’s really important to me that they have over the recommended daily value of vitamin D and B12. I have pretty significant deficiencies in those and have been told by my doctor to take a higher dose, so I’m always checking to see if it’s the right amount for me.

Getting my vitamin regimen right has made the biggest difference in my mood and energy levels, and I’ve been taking either a general women’s multivitamin or individual supplements for years.

When it comes to brands, I have no strong preference, but I gravitate toward a drugstore brand like Nature Made or Olly. I’ve taken more expensive vitamins before, and have felt the same impact from more affordable brands, as long as the ingredients are right.

»Get Heather’s take on Naked Whey protein powder.
Siobhan DeRemer
Types of supplements tested: probiotics and multivitamins
Health focus: gut health
I rely on research and take ingredients and reviews super seriously. I mainly stick to vitamins and supplements that I know can benefit me because I’ve worked with my doctor (vitamin D, multivitamins, probiotics). However, I’m willing to dig into reviews and research to see what might be helpful and isn’t included on my yearly bloodwork. I’ve become especially interested in collagen, biotin, and ways to get more protein as I’m getting older.

When looking for vitamins and supplements to add to my regimen, I check for third-party testing, certifications, and expert reviews first. I tend to avoid buying based on endorsements unless it’s someone I really trust, and I’m always mindful of side effects and how all of these things work together in my body. It can be hard to sift through everything, but sometimes the best are the least flashy!

»Learn what Siobhan has to say about SFI Health Ther-Biotic Pro IBS Relief probiotics.
Shelby Stanley
Types of supplements tested: multivitamins, creatine, probiotics, L-Theanine, L-Theronate, magnesium, berberine, and melatonin
Health focus: managing chronic conditions, supporting an active lifestyle, general wellness
I turn to vitamins and supplements to help support my overall wellness, manage stress, and stay active — but I know firsthand how overwhelming the supplement aisle (or website) can be. With so many options out there, I always look for brands that are clear about their ingredients, benefits, and how the product fits into a real daily routine.

As someone with sensitive skin, allergies, and a few health conditions that I manage naturally, I’m extra mindful about what goes in my body. I look for supplements that are transparent, free of unnecessary fillers, and actually help with things like energy, muscle recovery, digestion, and stress management.

Whether it’s sleep support, inflammation relief, or a product to boost performance in the gym, I appreciate formulas that are easy to understand, backed by research, and designed to make a difference in how you feel day to day.

»Get Shelby’s take on OLLY Probiotic + Prebiotic Gummies
Past testers
Although these testers are no longer actively testing new supplements for Healthline, you may still see their product feedback in our articles.

The 5 Best Multivitamins for Women — and Why Cheaper Can Be Better

On this page
Key takeaways
Healthline has vetted over 100 multivitamins, consulted with a dietitian, and personally tested more than 20 to select the best multivitamins for women.
We chose Nature Made’s Multi for Her as the best because it is cheap and contains all the right nutrients.
Runner-ups include Ritual Essential for Women 18+ for a more basic option and Mindbodygreen Ultimate Multivitamin+ for higher potency.
A quick look at the best multivitamins for women
Best overall: Nature Made Multi for Her Women's Multivitamin Tablets | Skip to review
If you already get a lot nutrients through food: Ritual Essential for Women 18+ Multivitamin | Skip to review
Reasonably priced with built-in omegas and collagen: Perelel Women's Daily Vitamin Trio | Skip to review
A highly potent option for bigger nutrient gaps: Mindbodygreen Ultimate Multivitamin+ | Skip to review
Best if organic ingredients are your priority: Garden of Life Organics Women's Multi Tablets | Skip to review
Healthline editors, dietitians, and medical integrity team members have vetted more than 100 products to decide on the best multivitamin for women. (Note: Sex and gender exist on spectrums. This article uses “women” to refer to a person’s sex assigned at birth.)

Hot take
“When it comes to supplements, the price is not always a good reflection of the quality,” says Kelli McGrane, MS, RD.

“There are plenty of expensive multivitamins that aren’t third-party tested for purity and potency or that contain types or amounts of nutrients that simply aren’t necessary for everyone. On the flip side, brands like Nature Made are more affordable, yet have extensive quality control measures and offer comprehensive formulations.”

After re-evaluating our picks in May 2025, with the help of Kelli, we bumped our budget-friendly pick — Nature Made Multi For Her — to our top pick. It may not be the flashiest brand, but it’s a very accessible price point and still includes an impressive mix of nutrients that are beneficial for women.
It does have a few shortcomings to consider. We cover those below, along with our other picks, and advice from a dietitian on the various nutrient forms.

We recommend these women’s multivitamins if you don’t have any specific nutrient or life stage concerns and are simply looking for a quality multivitamin with general coverage.

Disclaimer: Some of the products tested below were provided for free to Healthline editors or writers. Our opinions are ours alone and have not been reviewed, approved, or otherwise endorsed by the product manufacturers.


Healthline’s picks of the best multivitamins for women
Best overall
Nature Made Multi for Her Women's Multivitamin Tablets

4.7 (4k+) from Amazon
Form: tablet
Dose: 1 tablet per day
Certifications: USP verified
Price: $ = under $0.50 per serving
Subscribe and save for 10% discount and free shipping.

SHOP NOW AT IHERB
4.5
out of 5
healthline score
Healthline’s review
Why we chose it: Despite being less expensive than many others on the market, Nature Made Multi for Her still contains 23 nutrients important for women’s health and is third-party tested and verified by United States Pharmacopeia (USP). That means you can trust that the contents match the label.

Each 1 capsule-sized serving provides more than 100% of the daily value (DV) for vitamin D, B6, and folate. It also includes all 8 B vitamins (key for energy and metabolism).

It also contains 100% of the DV for iron in the highly absorbable form ferrous fumarate, making this a great option for women who are menstruating.

Versus other contenders: It also provides a good amount of calcium to support bone health as well as 25% of the DV for magnesium — an essential mineral that many people don’t get enough of.

Some nutrients are present in amounts lower than 100% of the DV, which may be a deal-breaker for some (though, it could be a pro for others). Remember, that multivitamins are meant to support your diet, and you should still be eating a mix of foods that provide key nutrients.

Downsides: Some of the nutrients, like magnesium, are present in forms the body doesn’t absorb as well. “However, this shouldn’t be a cause of concern unless you have a nutrient deficiency,” says Kelli. For most women, this multivitamin would still provide enough nutrient support.

Keep in mind that while ferrous fumarate is well absorbed by the body, it’s more likely to cause gastrointestinal (GI) side effects, such as constipation, than another form of iron called iron bisglycinate.

Additionally, if you prefer an organic multivitamin, our former top pick by Garden of Life may be a better option.



What our tester says





Pros & cons

Product details
If you already get a lot nutrients through food
Ritual Essential for Women 18+ Multivitamin

4.6 (839+) from Ritual
Form: capsule
Dose: 2 capsules per day
Certifications: USP verified, non-GMO verified, Made Traceable, Clean Label Project Certified
Price: $$ = $0.50 to $1.50 per serving
Use code "HEALTHLINE" for 25% Off!

SHOP NOW AT RITUAL
4.8
out of 5
healthline score
Healthline’s review
Why we chose it: This multivitamin provides nutrients that many women in their 20s and 30s often don’t get enough of, including vitamin D, folate, and omega-3 fatty acid docosahexaenoic acid (DHA).

Versus other contenders: Unlike our other picks, it only contains 2 out of 8 B vitamins. Most of the multivitamins on our list are designed to support nutrient gaps and balanced diets, and this one is the most minimalist.

It’s a good option for people who could use help getting key nutrients like vitamin D, folate, B12, iron, and magnesium. It’s best if you don’t need all the extra micronutrients.

It also stands out for containing omegas, but it only contains DHA. According to Kelli, the body needs both DHA and EPA to function at its best. (For consideration: Our Perelel pick below contains both if you don’t eat a lot of seafood to make up for this.)

Omega-3 DHA is associated with eye, heart, and brain health. While it’s typically found in fish, Ritual sources it from microalgae, which means it’s vegan-friendly.

Downsides: This product is geared toward women who already eat a mostly healthy diet and need help filling a few nutrient gaps.

Notably, the product is missing vitamin C, 6 out of 8 B vitamins, selenium, and calcium. Again, this could a positive for some people who get these through food.

Learn more about Ritual in our comprehensive review.



What our tester says





Pros & cons

Product details

Reasonably priced with built-in omegas and collagen
Perelel Women's Daily Vitamin Trio

4.8 (52+) from Perelel
Form: capsule
Dose: 3 capsules per day
Certifications: third-party tested for purity and potency
Price: $$ = $0.50 to $1.50 per serving
SHOP NOW AT PERELEL
4
out of 5
healthline score
Healthline’s review
Why we chose it: This isn’t technically the cheapest option. However, if you plan on taking a multivitamin in addition to omega-3s and collagen, it’s a good value for supplements that are third-party tested for purity and potency and made with highly absorbable forms.

The multivitamin is comprehensive with over 100% of the DV for vitamin D, folate, and vitamin B6. It also includes all 8 B vitamins and a small amount of magnesium.

Perelel’s supplements are third-party tested for purity and potency, though the name of the testing organization isn’t disclosed.

You can save 15% if you opt for recurring monthly shipments.

Versus other contenders: This women’s multivitamin includes an omega-3 supplement in the same pack that’s provides 350 mg of combined DHA and EPA to support brain and heart health. This is in line with what many health organizations recommend.

It also comes with a beauty blend capsule that includes biotin and hydrolyzed collagen. Collagen is the most abundant protein in your body and plays a key role in maintaining the health of your skin, muscles, and bones.

While more research is needed, collagen supplements have been linked with benefits for skin health (including reducing wrinkles) and for strengthening hair and nails. Other research demonstrates it has benefits for hydration and elasticity.

Downsides: Unlike most other picks on our list that require 1-2 pills per day, this one requires taking 3 capsules per day.

It also does not contain iron, which could be a positive for some. It’s not suitable for vegans (only Ritual and Mindbodygreen on our list are vegan).

Learn more about Perelel and our experience trying it in our full review.



What our tester says







Pros & cons

Product details

A highly potent option for bigger nutrient gaps
Mindbodygreen Ultimate Multivitamin+

4.7 (322+) from MindBodyGreen
Form: capsule
Dose: 2 capsules per day
Certifications: third-party tested for purity and potency
Price: $$$ = over $1.50 per serving
Use code "HEALTHLINE20" for 20% off.

SHOP NOW AT MINDBODYGREEN
4.5
out of 5
healthline score
Healthline’s review
Why we chose it: If you have a hard time getting enough iron in your diet, you may want to consider this multivitamin from mindbodygreen. Each 2-capsule serving contains 9 milligrams (mg) of iron, which is 50% of the daily value (DV) for premenopausal women.

What’s more, the form of iron used is thought to be easier on the stomach and potentially more effective for improving hemoglobin levels, though more research is needed.

Providing 27 key vitamins and minerals, mindbodygreen’s ultimate multivitamin+ is also the most comprehensive multivitamins on our list.

Mindbodygreen supplements undergo rigorous testing throughout the manufacturing process at International Organization for Standardization (ISO) certified third-party labs to ensure purity and potency.

The company’s ultimate multivitamin+ is also vegan-friendly, gluten-free, and soy-free, making it suitable for people with certain dietary restrictions.

Versus other contenders: This supplement stands out in that most nutrients are present in amounts at or exceeding 100% of the DV (which again, isn’t necessary for everyone).

In addition to vitamin D, folate, all 8 B vitamins and a handful of essential minerals, the product provides a good source of calcium and magnesium — both of which are important for women’s health.

While the nutrient amounts present aren’t necessary or appropriate for everyone, the formulation is worth considering for those who follow more limited or restrictive diets.

Downsides: The biggest downside of this multivitamin is the price. It’s really only necessary if you eat a limited diet. However, you can save $11 per bottle when you sign up for a monthly subscription.

Learn more about the brand in our full mindbodygreen review.



What our tester says







Pros & cons

Product details
Best if organic ingredients are your priority
Garden of Life Organics Women's Multi Tablets

4.7 (512+) from Iherb
Form: tablet
Dose: 2 tablets per day
Certifications: USDA organic, Non-GMO verified, certified vegan, certified gluten-free, kosher
Price: $$ = $0.50 to $1.50 per serving
SHOP NOW AT IHERB
Healthline's review
Why we chose it: Unlike the other multivitamins on our list, this one contains only nutrients from whole food sources. It contains 125% DV of vitamin D and all eight B vitamins. Almost all the nutrients are present over 100% DV, making it a fairly comprehensive option.

The product is also certified vegan, making it suitable for omnivores and vegans. It’s also certified gluten-free.

Like other on our list, all Garden of Life products are third-party tested for purity and potency. But the company also claims to test all products in house to make sure they’re free of heavy metals, microbial growth, and pathogenic species.

Vs other contenders: It’s the only women’s multivitamin on our list made with whole food ingredients. It’s formulated with an organic food blend made up of organic apple, strawberry, bell pepper, ginger, and many more.

It’s important to read the nutrition label to make sure you don’t have any sensitivities to the food sources.

Downsides: It’s low in iron (but this may be a positive for some people who no longer menstruate). Iron can also cause constipation, so if you find yourself in this way, you may appreciate less iron in your supplements.

It’s also the only option on our list that lack magnesium, which can support sleep, stress, and PMS symptoms.



What our tester says






Pros & cons

Product details
Comparing the best multivitamins for women
Here’s a quick look at how our top picks compare when it comes to some of the key nutrients:

Product
Vit D
Calcium
Folate
Vit E
Iron
B6
B12
Magnesium
Nature Made for Her Women’s Multi
125% DV
19% DV
250% DV
150% DV
100% DV
118% DV
250% DV
24% DV
Ritual Essential for Women 18+
250% DV
—
250% DV
45% DV
44% DV
—
333% DV
7% DV
Perelel Women’s Daily Vitamin Trio
250% DV
—
150% DV
67% DV
—
176% DV
417% DV
6% DV
mindbodygreen ultimate multivitamin+
125% DV
10% DV
250% DV
100% DV
50% DV
300% DV
10,000% DV
10% DV
Garden of Life Organics Women’s Once Daily Tablets
125%
—
100% DV
107% DV
14% DV
500% DV
200% DV
—
Other multivitamins for women that we evaluated and tested
Here are other multivitamins we tested that didn’t quite make the cut:

Note: We’ll be testing MegaFood Women’s Daily in June 2025 as a contender. We like that it’s affordable at a lower price point and contains real food ingredients and nutrient forms the body can absorb well. However, it’s not as rigorously tested. We’re reaching out for more information and testing it to consider against current picks.

Garden of Life mykind Organics Women’s Once Daily Tablets: If you want an organic multivitamin, this is a good option. It’s also third-party tested for purity and potency, certified NSF gluten-free, Non-GMO Project verified, certified carbon neutral, and certified vegan. It checks all the boxes nutrient-wise, but we did find the tablets to be on the larger side.
Love Wellness Daily Love Multivitamin: This woman-owned brand is third-party tested and easy to find online. However, our tester ultimately preferred other brands over this one, and our dietitian commented that it has very high doses of some vitamins. Additionally, it contains chasteberry, an herbal supplement that can interact with common medications like birth control pills, and ashwagandha, which isn’t safe for people who are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Mela Vitamins Daily Essentials for Women: It provides 300% of the DV for vitamin D, an essential nutrient that people of color are more likelyTrusted Source to be deficient in. It’s likely only necessary if you’re low in Vitamin D. Our tester found the pills easy to swallow, and they helped her nails grow, but they didn’t provide the same energy boost she’s used to with other multivitamins.
Smartypants Women’s Multi: These gummy vitamins have a subtle orange flavor that our tester enjoyed. They’re another good option if you’re looking for a gummy rather than a pill or capsule, but they do contain 6 g of added sugar.
Olly Women’s Multi is another gummy option. It provides several nutrients, including B vitamins, vitamin D, and chromium. It’s also free of iron, so it may be more appropriateTrusted Source for some postmenopausal women. But because it’s a gummy, it contains 2 g of added sugar.
Future Kind Essential Vegan Multivitamin includes only the nutrients that vegans tend to lack in their diet: vitamin B12, vitamin D, and omega-3s. It’s a great supplement for vegans who tend to eat most nutrients from food and don’t need the extra frills. It’s a quality vitamin that’s third-party tested, but since it only appeals to vegan diets, we didn’t include it in our top picks.
The women’s multivitamins we chose above are more general, but if you’re interested in vitamins specific to ages 50 and up,Thorne’s Women’s Multi 50+ gets our vote.
We break down why and all our multivitamin picks for women over 50 here.

ADVERTISEMENT
Build an understanding of your nutritional intake
Labcorp OnDemand’s Micronutrient Test may help you uncover nutritional deficiencies and make informed decisions about what you eat.

Clinics 5 miles away (95% of the U.S.)
HSA/FSA Payments Accepted
Walk-ins Welcome
4.8 ★'s on App Store
How we chose the best multivitamins for women
We rounded up the best multivitamins for women based on the following criteria that we believe to be important indicators of safety, quality, and transparency:

Nutrient quality: We looked for products that use highly absorbable forms of nutrients.
Ingredients: We included products made from quality ingredients and free of artificial additives. We also paid close attention to the types and amounts of nutrients included in each product.
Health concerns: We looked for products to suit a variety of needs.
Quality testing: We prioritized products tested for purity and potency, ideally by a third-party lab.
Brand reputation: Every product on our list is produced by a medically credible company. We also ensured that every brand is compliant with labeling requirements per the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
Vetting: All the multivitamins on our list have been vetted to ensure they align with Healthline’s brand integrity standards and approach to well-being. You can read more about our vetting process.
Once we had our list, we had testers try each vitamin for at least a week, if not longer, so they could comment on things like pill size and any positive or negative effects.

Why Trust Healthline
100+
multivitamins evaluated
55+
multivitamin brands evaluated
20+
multivitamins personally tested
How we evaluate multivitamins
Our Medical Standards and Insights team has carefully researched and vetted over 11,000 products and services. We fact-check health claims, evaluate ingredients, and look into each brand’s reputation before sharing products and services on Healthline.

To choose the products on this page, we considered all the multivitamins that passed our vetting process. Then, we personally tested some of them to narrow down our list even further.

Meet the expert
Kelli McGrane, MS, RD, is a registered dietitian and cookbook author with Bachelor’s and Master’s degrees in Nutritional Science from Boston University.

She has worked as a clinical dietitian at two Boston hospitals, a nutrition researcher for the University of Colorado and Children’s Hospital, and as a freelance nutrition writer and editor for several online publications.

Which vitamins should women take daily?
Before beginning any new supplement, we recommend talking with a healthcare professional. Not everyone needs to take multivitamins, and a doctor may recommend a single-nutrient vitamin instead.

There are many essential nutrients. However, some are particularly important to look for in a multivitamin, either because the nutrients play a key role in women’s health specifically or because women are more likely to consume inadequate amounts of them in their diets.

These nutrients include:

vitamin D
vitamin E
all eight B vitamins, especially vitamin B6 and folate
calcium
choline
iron
magnesium
Still, keep in mind that depending on your diet, you may not need a supplement that contains all the nutrients listed above. Additionally, nutrient needs and amounts vary depending on your stage of life, among other factors.

Other useful supplements
Looking to round out your wellness routine? Or didn’t see what you were looking for? Be sure to check out our other supplement roundups for women’s health:

Best Probiotics for Women
Best Prenatals
Best Vitamins for Hair, Skin, and Nails
Best Prenatal Vitamins for a Healthy Pregnancy
Best Supplements for Menopause
Frequently asked questions about women’s multivitamins

What’s the best women's multivitamin brand?



Do women’s multivitamins really work?





Is it good to take a multivitamin every day?





What’s the best time to take a multivitamin?


The bottom line
Multivitamins can help fill nutritional gaps for people who have difficulty meeting their nutrient needs through diet alone, as well as for people who are pregnant or nursing or have certain dietary restrictions.

But not everyone needs a multivitamin, and regularly consuming some nutrients in excess can be detrimental to overall health. Also, keep in mind that multivitamins have the potential to interact with other supplements or prescription medications.

Be sure to check with a healthcare professional before beginning any new supplements, including a multivitamin.


6 Best Probiotic Supplements for 2025, According to Dietitians

On this page
Key takeaways
You don’t need to take supplemental probiotics if you manage your health and have a balanced diet that includes natural probiotics. Which probiotic will be best for you will depend on your health goals and the probiotic strain you choose.
Some people supplement with capsule, powder, or beverage forms of probiotics to help with digestion, vaginal health, mood, fatigue, or chronic conditions that affect the gut.
To help you decide, we’ve tested 6 of the best options, with Culturelle being our best pick overall.
A quick look at the best probiotic supplements
Best overall: Culturelle Digestive Daily Probiotic Capsules | Skip to review
Best vegan probiotic: Ritual Synbiotic+ | Skip to review
Best for bloating: Mindbodygreen Advanced Probiotic+ | Skip to review
Best probiotic for menopause bloating: Seed DS-01 Daily Synbiotic | Skip to review
Cheapest probiotic: Jarrow Formulas Jarro-Dophilus EPS Capsules | Skip to review
Best probiotic for men: Hyperbiotics Pro Men | Skip to review
Healthline
Featured Partner Offer
Seed DS-01 Daily Synbiotic

4.2 (543+) from ConsumerLab
Price: $49.99
Dose: 2 capsules per day
Highlights: shelf-stable, research-backed probiotic strains, extensive quality and purity testing
Use code "HEALTHLINE" for 25% off.

SHOP NOW AT SEED
You may take probiotics to help reduce symptoms of certain medical conditions, bolster your immune health, improve depressive symptoms, and even promote weight management or mental wellness.

Not everyone needs to take a probiotic supplement, but if you and your healthcare team decide that you may benefit from one, there are many excellent products on the market.

This article features our picks of the 11 best probiotic supplements on the market. It also explains what probiotic supplements are, who may benefit from taking one, and how to choose the right product for your needs.

Pricing guide
$ = under $0.50 per serving
$$ = $0.50 to $1 per serving
$$$ = over $1 per serving

Healthline’s picks for the best probiotic supplements
Disclaimer: The probiotics tested below were provided for free by supplement manufacturers. Our opinions are ours alone and have not been reviewed, approved, or otherwise endorsed by the brands.

Best overall
Culturelle Digestive Daily Probiotic Capsules

4.6 (711+) from Culturelle
Dose: 1 capsule per day
Certifications: none
Shelf-stable: yes
Price per serving: $$
SHOP NOW AT OPTUM NOW
4
out of 5
healthline score
Healthline’s review
Why we love it: Culturelle is a well-known brand of probiotics and one of the best overall probiotic supplements thanks to its formulation and high colony-forming unit (CFU) count.


One capsule of Culturelle Digestive Daily Probiotic has 10 billion CFUs of Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, a probiotic strain that may benefit a number of health conditions, such as diarrhea and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).

This supplement also contains 200 milligrams (mg) of the prebiotic inulin, which fuels beneficial gut bacteria.


​​Culturelle guarantees that the stated number of CFUs on the box is viable through the expiration date of the product, something the National Institutes of Health (NIH) recommends customers look out for.


While products are not routinely tested for purity and potency by a third-party lab, the company states that it takes multiple measures to ensure quality and safety.

Culturelle probiotics have also been featured in multiple clinical studies, and the NSF International regularly audits the company’s processes.

The company also makes products to address specific needs of men and women.

Bonus: You don’t need to refrigerate it.



What our tester says





Pros & cons

Product details
Best vegan probiotic
Ritual Synbiotic+

4.7 (62+) from Ritual
Dose: 1 capsule per day
Certifications: third-party tested for purity and potency, Non-GMO Project verified, Made Traceable
Shelf-stable: yes
Per per serving: $$$
Use code "HEALTHLINE" for 25% Off!

SHOP NOW AT RITUAL
3.8
out of 5
healthline score
Healthline’s review
Why we love it: Ritual’s Synbiotic+ stands out from others on the market because it contains pre-, pro-, and postbiotics to support overall gut health. It’s also been helpful for our tester, who has been taking the supplement for nearly 3 years.

Postbiotics are bioactive compounds that bacteria secrete, often through fermentation. While some researchers believe postbiotics offer some health benefits, there’s limited research on the subject.


Ritual’s Synbiotic+ contains probiotic strains, such as Lactobacillus rhamnosus, that may be beneficial for people with IBS, though more research is needed.


The company conducted a test-tube study that suggested Synbiotic+ could support gut barrier function and increase the growth of beneficial bacteria. But keep in mind that because Ritual funded the study, there’s a risk of bias.



What our tester says









Pros & cons

Product details

Best for bloating
Mindbodygreen Advanced Probiotic+

4.5 (130+) from MindBodyGreen
Dose: 1 capsule per day
Certifications: third-party tested for purity and potency
Shelf-stable: yes
Price per serving: $2.67 per serving (30-count bottle)
Use code "HEALTHLINE20" for 20% off.

SHOP NOW AT MINDBODYGREEN
4.3
out of 5
healthline score
Healthline’s review
Why we love it: Mindbodygreen Probiotic+  is third-party tested, contains clinically tested probiotic strains to help alleviate bloating, and was highly reviewed by our tester.

This supplement provides a blend of Bifidobacterium lactis strains, as well as Lactobacillus acidophilus, both of which have the potential to help with bloating and immune function.

Specifically, this probiotic contains Bifidobacterium lactis Bi-07 to help ease bloating. Older research from 2011 found that abdominal bloating improved significantly over 8 weeks of treatment with this probiotic strain compared with placebo. However, there’s a lack of more robust research.

Read more in our full Mindbodygreen brand review.



What our tester says




Pros & cons

Product details
Best probiotic for menopause bloating
Seed DS-01 Daily Synbiotic

4.2 (543+) from ConsumerLab
Dose: 2 capsules per day
Certifications: third-party tested for allergens, pesticides and herbicides
Shelf-stable: yes
Price per serving : $$$
SHOP NOW AT SEED
4.5
out of 5
healthline score
Healthline’s review
Why we love it: Seed DS-01 is a subscription-based company with an eco-friendly approach to probiotics.

Customers receive their first orders in a refillable glass jar, which is used for subsequent refills. In addition to a 30-day supply of the synbiotic, first time users are also given a handy travel-sized glass vial.

Seed DS-01 contains a comprehensive blend of probiotics. Each 2-capsule serving delivers 24 different probiotic strains, including Lactiplantibacillus plantarum and Bifidobacterium lactis, both of which may be beneficial for heart health.

The supplement also stands out for including non-fermenting prebiotics that are compatible with a low FODMAP diet.

Seed probiotics undergo extensive testing throughout the manufacturing process and on final products to ensure purity and potency.

It’s worth noting that Seed DS-01 uses AFUs (active fluorescent units) instead of CFUs to measure the number of viable probiotic cells per dose. Research suggests that because AFUs are able to measure all viable cells, including those that may not be culturable, AFUs are a more accurate measure than CFUs.

Read more in our comprehensive review of Seed Probiotics.



What our tester says











Pros & cons

Product details

Cheapest probiotic
Jarrow Formulas Jarro-Dophilus EPS Capsules

4.5 (15.2k+) from iHerb
Dose: 2 capsules per day
Certifications: tested in-house for purity and potency
Shelf-stable: yes
Price per serving: $
SHOP NOW AT IHERB
4
out of 5
healthline score
Healthline’s review
Why we love it: Jarrow Formulas Jarro-Dophilus EPS is a third-party tested, multi-strain probiotic that’s impressively affordable. We also like that the capsules have an enteric coating, which is a barrier that helps minimize degradation in the stomach.

Some studies show that enteric-coated probiotics are more effective than non-enteric-coated probiotics. A 2019 study found that enteric coating led to a 20‐ to 40‐fold increase in the delivery of viable probiotics to the small intestine.

If the product is stored properly — at room temperature in a cool, dry environment — the 5 billion CFU count per capsule is guaranteed through the “best used before” date.



What our tester says






Pros & cons

Product details
Best probiotic for men
Hyperbiotics Pro Men

5 (4+) from Hyperbiotics
Dose: 1 tablet per day
Certifications: none
Shelf-stable: yes
Price per serving: $$
SHOP NOW AT HYPERBIOTICS
3.5
out of 5
healthline score
Healthline’s review
Why we love it: This product is formulated specifically for men’s health, with ingredients like curcumin, which is a powerful antioxidant that may benefit prostate health, though there’s mixed research on this.

It also contains several probiotic strains, including Lactiplantibacillus plantarum, which may be beneficial for heart health, as well as Bifidobacterium longum, which has been found to benefit those with significant IBS-related symptoms.

Hyperbiotics Pro Men is vegan, gluten-fee, non-GMO, and produced in an NSF-certified GMP facility, but the products are not third-party tested.



What our tester says






Pros & cons

Product details
A comparison of the best probiotic supplements
Product
Good for
Price per serving
Dose
Need refrigeration?
Third-party tested?
Culturelle Digestive Daily
• general digestive health
• IBS symptoms
• diarrhea
$$
1 capsule
no
no
Ritual Synbiotic+
• general digestive health
• IBS symptoms
• subscription
$$$
1 capsule
no
for purity and potency
Mindbodygreen Advanced Probiotic+
• immune health
• digestive health
$$$
1 capsule
no
for purity and potency
Seed DS-01 Synbiotic
• bloating
• eco-friendly subscription
$$$
2 capsules
no
for allergens, pesticides, and herbicides
Jarrow Formulas Jarro-Dophilus EPS
general digestive health
$
2 capsules
no
for purity and potency
Hyperbiotics Pro Men
men
$$
1 tablet
no
no
Meet our testers
HEALTHLINE NEWSLETTER
Get our free gut-friendly recipes
We rounded up a few nutritious and delicious recipes with foods that may help prevent flare ups. Join our digestive health newsletter for your free recipes and expert guidance twice a week.

Enter your email
Your privacy is important to us

How we chose the best probiotic supplements
We selected the best probiotics using the following criteria. Read more about our methodology for vetting dietary supplements.

Vetting: All the products have been vetted to ensure that they meet Healthline’s medical and business standards, adhere to FDA regulations on allowable health claims and labeling requirements, and are manufactured in facilities that adhere to CGMPs established by the FDA.
Credibility: The products we chose are made by medically credible companies that follow ethical, legal, and industry best standards and that provide objective measures of trust, including having supplements thoroughly tested for purity and potency, ideally by third-party organizations.
Ingredients: We looked for products that are made from high quality ingredients and free of artificial additives and fillers.
Personal needs: We included options to suit various needs and preferences, whether you need a specific probiotic strain or follow a gluten-free diet.
Reviews: We included options that were either tested and recommended by Healthline editors or that have overall positive reviews online.
Effective dose: Except for one product (which doesn’t use CFUs), all the supplements above contain at least 106 (1 million) CFUs per gram.
What are CFUs?
Probiotics are generally measured in colony-forming units (CFUs). These units represent the number of viable bacteria per dose.

Products labeled “1 x 109 CFU” contain 1 billion viable or live bacteria per dose. Most supplements contain 1 to 10 billion CFUsTrusted Source per dose, but some contain much larger amounts.

For beneficial effects, probiotics must be taken in quite large doses. Researchers suggest that probiotics must contain at least 106 (1 million) viable CFUs per gram to survive digestion and positively affect the body.

How to choose the best probiotic supplement for you
If you’re interested in taking a probiotic supplement, it’s important to determine whether it is necessary for your specific health needs.

If you’re instructed to take a probiotic, consider the following:

CFUs: The product quality matters. It’s important to look for probiotics that contain at least 106 (1 million) CFUs per gram, as research suggests that this is the minimum amount needed to exert positive effects in the body.
Probiotic strains: Probiotics are not one-size-fits-all remedies, and certain probiotic strains are much more effective for specific medical conditions and symptoms than others. Look for supplements with particular strains based on your needs.
Intended use: The effectiveness of probiotic supplements is not only strain-specific but also disease-specific, meaning the correct strain and dose must be appropriateTrusted Source for the condition or symptom you intend to treat.
Brand: Manufacturing processes, shelf life, and formulation type can significantly affectTrusted Source a probiotic supplement’s effectiveness. So, it’s essential to buy probiotics from established, physician-trusted brands.
Storage requirements: Some probiotics require refrigeration. Check the product label for proper storage instructions. In general, probiotics are sensitive to heat. Thus, if they don’t require refrigeration, you’ll want to store them in a cool, dry area.
Also, keep in mind that because probiotics are quite vulnerable to factors such as temperature change and storage time, many may no longer be viable by the time you purchase them.

For this reason, the NIHTrusted Source recommends that customers choose products that list the CFUs at the end of a product’s shelf life. This indicates that a product contains a therapeutic number of CFUs after a person purchases a product.


What are the benefits of taking probiotics?
Probiotic supplements have been linked to some health benefits. But while research on probiotics has increased significantly over the past 20 years, researchers are still learning about them and their health effects.

Probiotics may:

Improve symptoms of IBS: ResearchTrusted Source suggests that probiotics, especially multi-strain products containing Lactobacillus acidophilus, may help improve symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), such as bloating and abdominal pain.
Help with diarrhea: Studies indicate that probiotics may help improve multiple types of diarrhea, including infectiousTrusted Source diarrhea, antibiotic-associatedTrusted Source diarrhea, and travelers’Trusted Source diarrhea. Certain strains, including Lactobacillus rhamnosus GGTrusted Source and Saccharomyces boulardiiTrusted Source, seem to be particularly effective for treating diarrhea in children and adults.
Help with constipation: Some probiotics, such as ​​Bifidobacterium lactis, may help improve constipation. However, study results varyTrusted Source, with some showing no improvements in constipation with probiotics.
Help reduce UTI frequency: Some studiesTrusted Source show that taking probiotics Lactobacillus rhamnosus GR-1 and Lactobacillus reuteri RC-14 may help reduce urinary tract infections (UTIs) in women. However, study results are conflictingTrusted Source.
Promote immune health: Evidence supports the role of probiotic supplements in maintainingTrusted Source immune health. Several studies suggest that probiotics may enhance immune function in certain populationsTrusted Source, but more research is needed.
Benefit metabolic health and weight management: Alterations in gut bacteria may contribute to obesity and metabolic issues, and some studies show that probiotic supplements may promote weight loss. ResearchTrusted Source in this area is ongoing.
Improve cardiovascular risk factors: Probiotic supplements may help reduce blood lipid levels in some people, which may decreaseTrusted Source the risk of heart disease. However, evidence is limited at this time.
Help manage certain mood and emotional disorders: Studies suggest that certain probiotics may help reduce symptoms of depression and anxiety, but there’s a need for more high quality studies before researchers can make any strong conclusions.
To use or not to use probiotics?
Contrary to popular belief, probiotic supplements are not necessary or appropriate for most people.

Not only can they be expensive, but they may also lead to side effectsTrusted Source such as bloating—which some of our testers experienced—and bacterial overgrowth.

Plus, probiotic supplements could lead to excessive immune stimulation and infection among people with weakened immune systems.

Probiotics can also change how a drug works and how effective it is. Research shows that they can increase or decrease a drug’s effect on the body. Although more research needs to be done, you should always discuss whether taking probiotics is safe alongside any medication you take.

Before you try a probiotic
Avoid taking probiotics before consulting a healthcare professional. They can help you decide whether a probiotic supplement is appropriate and provide brand and dosage recommendations.

While some people, including those with IBS and certain types of IBD, may benefit from specific strains of probiotics, most people who follow a nutritious diet and healthy lifestyle do not need to take probiotic supplements.

What’s more, some researchers are concernedTrusted Source that the widespread use of probiotics may lead to antibiotic resistance and warn that many studies investigating the safety and effectiveness of probiotics are of low quality.

For these reasons, avoid taking probiotics before consulting a healthcare professional. They can help you decide whether a probiotic supplement is appropriate and give brand and dosage recommendations.

None of these stand out to you?
You might want to read these articles to see if we have a pick that suits your needs:

Best probiotics for IBS
Best probiotics for women
Best probiotics for men
Best probiotics to support weight loss
When to talk with a doctor
If you’re experiencing gastrointestinal symptoms such as abdominal pain, bloating, cramping, diarrhea, and constipation; have received a diagnosis of IBD or IBS; or are concerned about your vaginal health, you may benefit from a probiotic.

However, it’s a good idea to schedule an appointment with a healthcare professional first because your symptoms could be related to a condition that requires a specific treatment or medication.

Additionally, taking a probiotic can do more harm than good in some individuals, so it’s important to discuss options with a trusted expert before trying anything new.

Frequently asked questions about probiotic supplements

What is the most effective probiotic supplement?



Is it OK to take a probiotic every day?


What is the downside of taking probiotics?


Why do cardiologists warn against probiotics?


The bottom line
Probiotic supplements may be helpful for people with certain conditions, such as IBS, constipation, and UTIs.

However, probiotics aren’t necessary for everyone, and the effectiveness of probiotic supplements depends on the strain, dosage, and condition being treated.

Finally, there are many other ways to care for your gut microbiome and overall health that don’t involve dietary supplements, such as following a nutrient-dense diet, managing your stress levels, and maintaining a moderate weight.

A quick look at the best fish oil for kids
Best overall: Nordic Naturals Children’s DHA | Skip to review
A gummy without added sugar: Nordic Naturals Children's DHA Gummy Chews | Skip to review
A good liquid option with more value: California Gold Nutrition Kids Omega-3 Fish Oil | Skip to review
A gummy multivitamin that contains fish oil: NatureMade Kids First Multivitamin + Omega-3 Gummies | Skip to review
Most convenient for kids on the go: Omegavia Kids Omega-3 Gummies | Skip to review
A vegan-friendly liquid option: Garden of Life Kids Plant Omega-3 Liquid | Skip to review
Best for infants when pediatrician recommends: Nordic Naturals Baby's DHA  | Skip to review
Fish oil supplements can be a quick and convenient way to squeeze extra omega-3 fatty acids — including docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) — into your child’s diet to support brain and heart healthTrusted Source.

While most kids can meet their nutritional needs through a balanced diet, fish oil can be useful for picky eaters and those who don’t often eat seafood or other foods high in omega-3.

From liquids to softgels to gummies, there are many different options on the market designed specifically for kids. Keep reading for what you should look for, along with a few of our top picks.

Best overall
Nordic Naturals Children’s DHA

4.5 (10.3k+) from Amazon
Form: liquid or sotgels
EPA: 170 mg
DHA: 255 mg
Recommended age: 1 to 6 years
SHOP NOW AT AMAZON
Healthline's review
Nordic Naturals Children’s DHA is a high quality fish oil supplement for kids. It comes in Strawberry flavor and provides 250 milligrams (mg) of total omega-3 sourced from wild Arctic cod, with 80 mg of EPA and 120 mg of DHA per serving when choosing the softgel form.

It’s available in both softgel and liquid form. Because the recommended dose is 4 softgels daily (which can be chewed), many might prefer the liquid option.

However — hint — the California Gold liquid pick below is about the same price but includes more per bottle and also contains more EPA and DHA if you’re looking for a higher dose. That said, it doesn’t make test results available like Nordic Naturals and does not have any sustainability certifications.

It’s certified sustainable by FOS and third-party tested for purity, with test results available for all products.



Pros & cons

Product details
A gummy without added sugar
Nordic Naturals Children's DHA Gummy Chews
Form: gummies
EPA: 145 mg per serving
DHA: 355 mg per serving
Recommended age: 3 years and older
SHOP NOW AT AMAZON
Healthline's review
If your child prefers gummies over softgels or liquids, consider giving this fish oil from Nordic Naturals a try.

Formulated with 145 mg of EPA and 355 mg of DHA per serving, these tropical punch-flavored gummy chews provide more omega-3 fatty acids than our top pick. However, be mindful that if your kid already consumes omega-3 through their diet, they may not need a higher dose.

These gummies are free from added sugar, sustainably sourced, and made without artificial ingredients.

Like other Nordic Naturals products, they are also third-party tested, with a COA detailing the results available on the company’s website.



Pros & cons

Product details
A good liquid option with more value
California Gold Nutrition Kids Omega-3 Fish Oil
Form: liquid
EPA: 370 mg per serving
DHA: 230 mg per serving
Recommended age: 4+ years
SHOP NOW AT IHERB
Healthline's review
Clocking in at just $0.24 per serving, this supplement from California Gold Nutrition can be an inexpensive way to squeeze omega-3 into your child’s daily diet.

It provides 700 mg of total omega-3s per serving, including 370 mg of EPA and 230 mg of DHA.

Additionally, it’s available in a Natural Lemon flavor and can be taken as is or mixed into drinks or snacks.

This supplement is reportedly third-party tested by iHerb and produced in a facility compliant with current Good Manufacturing Practices (cGMPs) set by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).

Pros: third-party tested, produced in third-party audited facility, cost effective, non-GMO

Cons: only one flavor available, not suitable for those with a soy allergy



Pros & cons

Product details
A gummy multivitamin that contains fish oil
NatureMade Kids First Multivitamin + Omega-3 Gummies
Form: gummies
EPA: 5 mg per serving
DHA: 25 mg per serving
Recommended age: ages 4–18
SHOP NOW AT NATURE MADE
Healthline's review
With nine essential nutrients and 30 mg of combined EPA and DHA per serving, this gummy multivitamin from Nature Made can help streamline your child’s supplement routine.

While it’s not technically a fish oil supplement, it provides 113.5 mg of omega-3s per serving derived from fish oil, along with an assortment of other essential vitamins and minerals.

Each bottle contains three fruity flavors and is suitable for kids ages 4 to 18.

These gummies are also free from artificial flavors and sweeteners, though they contain a small amount of added sugar per serving.

They are verified by United States Pharmacopeia (USP), a third-party organization that helps ensure the quality of dietary supplements through a comprehensive testing and evaluation process.

If your child is vegan or vegetarian, you could also consider Smarty Pants Kids Plus Multi & Omegas instead.



Pros & cons

Product details
Most convenient for kids on the go
Omegavia Kids Omega-3 Gummies
Form: gummies
EPA: 60 mg per serving
DHA: 300 mg per serving
Recommended age: ages 3+
SHOP NOW AT AMAZON
Healthline's review

Omegavia Kids Omega-3 Chewies come individually wrapped, making them a convenient and mess-free option you can simply slip into your child’s lunchbox or backpack each morning.


They’re also free from sugar and naturally flavored, and each serving contains 60 mg of EPA and 300 mg of DHA.


What’s more, they’re 5-star tested by International Fish Oil Standards (IFOS), an independent organization that tests fish oil products for safety, purity, potency, and freshness.


According to the company, this supplement is also manufactured in third-party, audited, and cGMP-compliant facilities within the United States.




Pros & cons

Product details
A vegan-friendly liquid option
Garden of Life Kids Plant Omega-3 Liquid
Form: liquid
EPA: 100 mg per serving
DHA: 265 mg per serving
Recommended age: ages 4+
SHOP NOW AT IHERB
Healthline's review
While fish oil supplements aren’t suitable for vegans or vegetarians, this plant-based option from Garden of Life offers a kid-friendly way to boost omega-3 intake without any animal products.

It’s derived from a blend of algal and flaxseed oils and delivers 880 mg of total omega-3s per serving, including 265 mg of DHA and 100 mg of EPA.

It’s not only non-GMO and certified vegan but also certified gluten-free and made without artificial ingredients.

Like other liquid supplements, it’s also easy to sneak into yogurt, smoothies, oatmeal, or juice, making it a suitable choice for picky eaters or kids who dislike gummies and softgels.



Pros & cons

Product details
Best for infants when pediatrician recommends
Nordic Naturals Baby's DHA
Form: liquid
EPA: 350 mg per serving
DHA: 485 mg per serving
Recommneded age: babies 5-35 lbs
SHOP NOW AT AMAZON
Healthline's review
Because breast milk and most formulas contain DHA, babies don’t usually need an omega-3 supplement.

However, if your pediatrician has recommended a fish oil supplement for your infant, this supplement is a suitable option to consider.

It contains 1,050 mg of total omega-3 per serving — 350 mg of EPA and 485 mg of DHA. It also contains 7.5 micrograms (mcg) of vitamin D, which is recommended for all babies who are not exclusively formula-fed.

Similar to other supplements from Nordic Naturals, this product is certified sustainable by FOS and third-party tested for freshness and purity.



Pros & cons

Product details
How we chose these fish oil supplements for kids
As we compiled our list of the best fish oil supplements for kids, we considered the following factors:

Nutrients: We selected supplements made with DHA and EPA, the easiest forms of omega-3 fatty acids for your body to use.
Ingredients: We prioritized supplements made with high quality ingredients, which are free from artificial additives, unnecessary fillers, and preservatives.
Quality testing: Many of the supplements on our list have been tested by third-party labs to help ensure purity, safety, and quality.
Online reviews: We read real reviews from parents to determine which fish oil supplements for kids should make the cut.
Vetting: All products on our list have been vetted to ensure they align with Healthline’s brand integrity standards and approach to well-being. You can read more about our vetting process.
What to look for in a fish oil supplement for kids (and what to avoid)
There are several factors you can consider when shopping for a fish oil supplement for your child.

A few of the key points to keep in mind include:

Nutrients: Be sure to check the dose of DHA and EPA provided in your fish oil supplement. Additionally, some omega-3 supplements may also contain other nutrients — such as vitamins A, D, or E — so remember to check the label carefully, especially if your child is taking other vitamins or supplements.
Other ingredients: Steer clear of fish oil supplements that contain artificial ingredients, fillers, or excessive amounts of added sugar. Instead, stick to products low in added sugar with a simple list of ingredients.
Form: Fish oil is available in several forms, including liquids, gummies, and softgels. While liquid may be easier to mix into foods or drinks, some children and parents may prefer the taste or convenience of gummies and softgels instead.
Source: Omega-3 supplements are typically derived from fatty fish, krill, cod liver, or algae. Consider your child’s dietary requirements and personal preferences to determine which is right for you.
Testing: Ideally, opt for supplements that are tested or certified by an independent organization for safety and quality. This can help ensure that your fish oil is free from harmful contaminants or heavy metals, such as mercury.
Cost: Fish oil supplements are available at a wide range of price points. Be sure to keep your budget in mind and remember that a higher price tag doesn’t always translate to a higher quality product.
The benefits of fish oil for kids
Fish oil supplements can be an easy way to help boost your child’s intake of omega-3 fatty acids, especially if seafood isn’t a regular part of their meal plan.

It may also be linked to a few possible health perks, including for the following:

May support brain health: Omega-3 fatty acids play a key role in brain development during childhood and adolescence and have been tied to several benefits, especially related to attention, memory, executive function, and communication.
May aid sleep: Research suggests that omega-3 fatty acids could reduceTrusted Source sleep disturbances and improve other aspects of sleep health during childhood.
Possible benefits for asthma: One study found that getting enough omega-3 fatty acids in the diet may actually be linked to a lower riskTrusted Source of asthma in children and adolescents.
However, keep in mind that fish oil supplements are not necessary for all children, especially if they regularly consume foods rich in omega-3, such as fatty fish.

ADVERTISEMENT
Build an understanding of your nutritional intake
Labcorp OnDemand’s Micronutrient Test may help you uncover nutritional deficiencies and make informed decisions about what you eat.

Clinics 5 miles away (95% of the U.S.)
HSA/FSA Payments Accepted
Walk-ins Welcome
4.8 ★'s on App Store
Who should not take fish oil?
Not all kids need fish oil, especially if they’re following a balanced diet and eating seafood on a regular basis. In fact, taking high doses of fish oil could causeTrusted Source unpleasant side effects like heartburn, nausea, and diarrhea.

Children who are allergic to fish or shellfish also need to avoid fish oil. If needed, they can opt for omega-3 supplements from other sources instead, such as algal oil.

If your child is taking any medications or other supplements, it’s also a good idea to check in with your pediatrician before adding fish oil to the mix.

Additionally, keep in mind that certain types of omega-3 supplements may contain high amounts of nutrients commonly found in multivitamins — like vitamin ATrusted Source or vitamin ETrusted Source — which can be harmful if consumed in excess.

Fish oil for ADHD
Omega-3 fatty acids have been studied for their ability to support brain health and improve symptoms of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in children. However, research has turned up mixed results on their effectiveness.

For example, one study in 60 children with ADHD found that supplementing with 550 mg of EPA and 225 mg of DHA per day for 8 weeks could be tiedTrusted Source to less impulsive behavior.

Another 12-week study in 92 adolescents concludedTrusted Source that 1.2 grams of EPA per day could improve cognitive (thinking ability) symptoms in children and teens with ADHD, especially for those with low blood levels of EPA at baseline. On the other hand, researchers note that those with high levels of EPA could actually be negatively affected.

Other studies suggest that there may be a link between EPA deficiency and the severity of ADHD symptoms.

That being said, one review of 37 trials concludedTrusted Source that polyunsaturated fatty acids (including omega-3s) had no significant effect on parent-rated inattention, hyperactivity, impulsivity, or overall ADHD symptoms in children compared to a placebo.

A 2023 meta-analysis also found that omega-3 supplementation does not improveTrusted Source ADHD symptoms but could offer other long-term benefits.

Therefore, while omega-3 fatty acids can benefit brain health, it’s still a good idea to check in with your pediatrician before using fish oil to help manage symptoms of ADHD.

Frequently asked questions about fish oil for kids

Do kids really need fish oil?



What is the right age to start taking fish oil?



What are the side effects of taking fish oil?


How much fish oil for ADHD kids?


The takeaway
Most children can meet their nutritional needs by following a balanced diet and don’t need supplementation.

However, fish oil supplements can be a simple way to boost your child’s intake of omega-3 fatty acids if needed. They may be especially useful for picky eaters and those who aren’t getting enough foods rich in omega-3s in their diet.

Be sure to check with your child’s pediatrician before trying any new supplement. They can provide guidance on an appropriate dosage and make personalized recommendations based on your child’s needs.

The Best L-Glutamine Supplements 2025

On this page
Key takeaways
L-glutamine supplements may support health when the body is not producing adequate amounts, such as during illness or injury.
Supplements typically provide around 200 milligrams (mg) to 1,000 mg of L-glutamine per serving.
Our top choices for L-glutamine supplements are Thorne for quality and Nutricost for taste and affordability.
A quick look at the best L-glutamine supplements
Best overall: Thorne L-Glutamine | Skip to review
Best for taste: Nutricost L-Glutamine Powder | Skip to review
Most affordable: Double Wood L-Glutamine Supplement | Skip to review
Best with BCAA: Designs for Health BCAA Powder with L-Glutamine | Skip to review
Our top picks for L-glutamine supplements
Best overall
Thorne L-Glutamine
Form: capsule
Number of servings: 90
L-glutamine per serving: 500 mg
*Price may vary.

Healthline's review
Why we chose it: Thorne is a well-established supplement brand that tops our list of best vitamin brands for its commitment to quality.

Many Thorne supplements are NSF certified, meaning they have undergone independent testing for safety and purity.

Each serving provides 500 mg of L-glutamine, the typical dose for most L-glutamine supplements. Thorne recommends taking 1 capsule up to three times daily, for a maximum dose of 1,500 mg.

Capsules offer a convenient, mess-free way to take pre-dosed supplements. It may suit beginners or people on the go.

Thorne has a range of supplements that are NSF Certified for Sport, meaning they are approved as safe for professional athletes. This range includes the powder version of its L-glutamine supplement.

The powder supplement is available in a 504-gram tub that provides 90 servings, like the capsule version. However, the cost per serving is much higher than the other pure L-glutamine powders in this roundup.

The L-glutamine capsules are free from dairy, gluten, and soy. Thorne uses third-party certified facilities to manufacture its supplements.

Read our in-depth Thorne review.



Pros & cons

Product details
Best for taste
Nutricost L-Glutamine Powder
Form: powder
Number of servings: 50
L-glutamine per serving: 500 mg
SHOP NOW AT NUTRICOST
Healthline's review
Why we chose it: This L-glutamine powder is available in a wide range of flavors, which may suit people who don’t like unflavored supplement drinks.

Nutricost offers its L-glutamine powder in three sizes: 250 g, 500 g, or 1 kilogram (kg). The 1 kg version provides 200 servings, and the price per serving is $0.16. For people looking to bulk buy L-glutamine, this is one of the most affordable options available.

Nutricost’s L-glutamine is available in a wide range of flavors:

Unflavored
Blue Raspberry
Fruit Punch
Peach Mango
Green Apple
Blackberry Lemonade
All Nutricost supplements are manufactured in a facility registered with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The facility also complies with current good manufacturing practices (CGMPs). The powder is vegetarian-friendly and free from gluten, soy, and GMOs.



Pros & cons

Product details
Most affordable
Double Wood L-Glutamine Supplement
Form: capsule
Number of servings: 60
L-glutamine per serving: 1,000 mg
*Price may vary.

Healthline's review
Why we chose it: Double Wood offers affordable, third-party-tested supplements with certificates of analysis (COAs) available online. Double Wood uses a cCGMP certified facility.

Double Woods offers L-glutamine supplements in both powder and capsule form. Both provide 500 mg L-glutamine per serving. The powder version comes in a 500 g tub with 100 servings. It is much lower cost than Thorne’s L-glutamine powder.

The recommended serving size is two capsules, providing 1,000 mg of L-glutamine. Though the dose per serving is higher than Thorne’s, the dose per capsule is the same at 500 mg.

These vegan supplements are free from gluten and GMOs.

This is a suitable choice if you want an L-glutamine supplement with a low upfront cost.

Read our in-depth review of Double Wood supplements.



Pros & cons

Product details
Best with BCAA
Designs for Health BCAA Powder with L-Glutamine
Form: powder
Number of servings: 30 per container
SHOP NOW AT AMAZON
Healthline's review
Why we chose it: This powder from Designs for Health combines branch-chain amino acids (BCAAs) with L-glutamine, which may enhance their potential benefits.

BCAA combines three essential amino acids: leucine, isoleucine, and valine.

Popular with athletes, BCAA supplements may help improve performance and reduce muscle fatigue. Other proven benefits include improved muscle growth and decreased muscle wastage.

This vegetarian supplement is free from gluten and GMOs. It contains stevia as a sweetener and has an orange flavor.

Designs for Health is cGMP certified. Its supplements undergo third-party testing at an ISO 17025 laboratory to confirm purity and potency. A COA is also available to customers upon request.

Find out Healthline’s favorite BCAA supplements.

BCAA supplements are unsuitable for those who are pregnant, nursing, or have maple syrup urine disease.



Pros & cons

Product details
Comparing the best L-glutamine supplements
Price	Form	Dose per serving	(Total servings)	Price per serving
Thorne	$24,
$63	capsule,
powder	500 mg	90	$0.26,
$0.70
Nutricost	$17.97 to $32.97	powder	500 mg	50 to 200	$0.16 to $0.35
Double Wood	$14.95, $24.95	capsule, powder	1,000 mg	60,
100	$0.24
Designs for Health	$69.99	powder	200 mg	30	$2.25
How we chose the best L-glutamine supplements
All supplements we feature on Healthline have passed our rigorous vetting criteria, which evaluates brands and products for quality, health claims, certifications, and more.

»MORE:How we evaluate vitamins, minerals, and supplements.
To select the best L-glutamine supplements, we considered the following:

Testing: We prioritize brands that put their products through independent, third-party testing to establish purity and potency.
Ingredients: We look for brands that use high quality ingredients and limit or avoid artificial flavors, fillers, and preservatives.
Certifications: We looked for brands that offer products with additional certifications from third-party organizations, such as NSF.
Reputation: We choose brands approved by our nutrition experts and with positive customer reviews.
Price: We select products that suit various budgets while providing good value.
Why Trust Healthline
1320+
vitamins, minerals, and supplements evaluated
95+
vitamins, minerals, and supplements personally tested
40+
vitamin, mineral, and supplement brands personally tested
How we evaluate vitamins, minerals, and supplements
Our Medical Standards and Insights team has carefully researched and vetted over 11,000 products and services. We fact-check health claims, evaluate ingredients, and look into each brand’s reputation before sharing products and services on Healthline.

To choose the brands on this page, we considered all the vitamin brands that passed our vetting process. Then, we personally tested some of them to narrow down our list even further.

ADVERTISEMENT
Build an understanding of your nutritional intake
Labcorp OnDemand’s Micronutrient Test may help you uncover nutritional deficiencies and make informed decisions about what you eat.

Clinics 5 miles away (95% of the U.S.)
HSA/FSA Payments Accepted
Walk-ins Welcome
4.8 ★'s on App Store
Why take L-glutamine supplements?
L-glutamine is an amino acid that is important for various bodily functions. It is sometimes referred to as simply glutamine, though this has a different structure than L-glutamine.

The body needs essential and nonessential amino acids to create various proteins. A nonessential amino acid, like L-glutamine, is a protein the body can produce itself, so a person does not need to get it from food.

Most people with no health issues do not require L-glutamine supplementation. However, some may benefit from L-glutamine supplements when their body’s reserves are low. Deficiencies may occur when the body is experiencing strain on glutamine supplies, such as during illness or injury, or after strenuous exercise.

Current research suggests that L-glutamine benefits may include supporting muscle growth and recovery after exercise, managing gastrointestinal conditions, and supporting immune system function.

Just a few studies showing the benefits of L-glutamine supplementation are listed below:

Athletic performance and recovery: A 2024 study found that taking L-glutamine after intensive combat sports training improved hormone levels, mood, and resistance to respiratory infections. A 2020 study among older adults in an exercise program experienced greater health benefits when taking L-glutamine supplements.
Gastrointestinal health: A 2024 review notes that, though further research is necessary, clinical studies have found leaky supplementation beneficial for managing leaky gut syndrome and improving intestinal permeability in conditions such as Crohn’s disease and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). A 2021 study suggests that, in combination with a low FODMAP diet, L-glutamine supplementation may help manage IBS symptoms.
Weight: A 2019 study in rats indicated that glutamine supplements may help manage overweight and obesity. A 2019 meta-analysis of clinical trials concluded that, although glutamine supplementation did not improve athletic aerobic performance or body composition, it did lead to improved weight reduction.
Treatment applications: A 2020 study found that L-glutamine supplementation may help prevent the onset and progression of atrial fibrillation. A 2024 study supports that L-glutamine supplementation effectively manages sickle cell disease complications.
While L-glutamine supplementation has many proven uses, most people with no health issues will not need to take it, as their bodies should produce enough.

Those considering taking L-glutamine on a regular basis need to consult a healthcare professional first, particularly if they have existing conditions or are taking any medication.

Frequently asked questions about L-glutamine supplements

Which brand of L-glutamine is best?




What is the best form to take L-glutamine?



What happens if I take L-glutamine everyday?



Takeaway
While most people do not need to take L-glutamine, some can benefit from a supplement. Many options are available if you are at risk of an L-glutamine deficiency due to exercise, injury, or illness.

Thorne and Double Wood are our top picks for L-glutamine supplements, based on quality, affordability, and safety.
L-glutamine supplements may support athletic performance and recovery, gastrointestinal health, weight management, and more. If you have concerns about L-glutamine deficiency, speak to a healthcare professional.


