More than 2,000 years ago, Hippocrates — the father of modern medicine — suggested that all disease begins in the gut.

While some of his wisdom has stood the test of time, you may wonder whether he was right in this regard.

This article tells you all you need to know about the connection between your gut and disease risk.


Disease Risk and Your Gut
Though Hippocrates was incorrect in suggesting that all disease begins in your gut, evidence shows that many chronic metabolic diseases do.

Your gut bacteria and the integrity of your gut lining strongly affect your health. (1Trusted Source).

According to numerous studies, undesirable bacterial products called endotoxins can sometimes leak through your gut lining and enter your bloodstream (2Trusted Source).

Your immune system then recognizes these foreign molecules and attacks them — resulting in chronic inflammation (3Trusted Source).

Some hypothesize that this diet-induced inflammation may trigger insulin and leptin resistance — driving factors for type 2 diabetes and obesity, respectively. It’s also believed to cause fatty liver disease.

At the very least, inflammation has been strongly linked to many of the world’s most serious conditions (4Trusted Source, 5, 6).

Nonetheless, keep in mind that this area of research is rapidly developing, and current theories may be overhauled in the future.

SUMMARY
Though not all disease begins in the gut, many chronic metabolic conditions are hypothesized to be caused or influenced by chronic gut inflammation.


Effects of Chronic Inflammation
Inflammation is your immune system’s response to foreign invaders, toxins, or cell injury.

Its purpose is to help your body attack these unwanted invaders and begin repair of damaged structures.

Acute (short-term) inflammation, such as after a bug bite or injury, is generally considered a good thing. Without it, pathogens like bacteria and viruses could easily take over your body, causing sickness or even death.

However, another type of inflammation — called chronic, low-grade, or systemic inflammation — may be harmful, as it’s long term, may affect your entire body, and inappropriately attacks your body’s cells (7Trusted Source, 8Trusted Source).

For example, your blood vessels — such as your coronary arteries — may be inflamed, as well as structures in your brain (9Trusted Source, 10Trusted Source).

Chronic, systemic inflammation is now believed to be one of the leading drivers of some of the world’s most serious conditions (11).

These include obesity, heart disease, type 2 diabetes, metabolic syndrome, Alzheimer’s disease, depression, and numerous others (12, 13Trusted Source, 14Trusted Source, 15Trusted Source, 16Trusted Source).

Still, the exact causes of chronic inflammation are currently unknown.

SUMMARY
Inflammation is your immune system’s response to foreign invaders, toxins, and cell injury. Chronic inflammation — involving your entire body — is believed to drive many serious diseases.


Endotoxins and Leaky Gut
Your gut houses trillions of bacteria — collectively known as your gut flora (17Trusted Source).

While some of these bacteria are beneficial, others are not. As a result, the number and composition of your gut bacteria can greatly affect both your physical and mental health (18).

The cell walls of some of your gut bacteria — called gram-negative bacteria — contain lipopolysaccharides (LPS), large molecules also known as endotoxins (19Trusted Source, 20Trusted Source).

These substances can cause an immune reaction in animals. During an acute bacterial infection, they can lead to fever, depression, muscle pains, and even septic shock (21Trusted Source).

In addition, these substances can sometimes leak from the gut into the bloodstream — either constantly or right after meals (22Trusted Source, 23Trusted Source).

Endotoxins may either be carried into your blood circulation along with dietary fat, or they may leak past the tight junctions that are supposed to prevent unwanted substances from getting across your gut lining (24Trusted Source, 25Trusted Source).

When this happens, they activate immune cells. Though their amounts are too small to cause symptoms of an infection like fever, they’re high enough to stimulate chronic inflammation, causing issues over time (26Trusted Source, 27Trusted Source).

Therefore, increased gut permeability — or leaky gut — may be the key mechanism behind diet-induced chronic inflammation.

When endotoxin levels in your blood increase to levels that are 2–3 times higher than normal, this condition is known as metabolic endotoxemia (28Trusted Source).

SUMMARY
Some bacteria in your gut contain cell wall components called lipopolysaccharides (LPS), or endotoxins. These can leak into your body and trigger inflammation.

Unhealthy Diet and Endotoxemia
Many studies on endotoxemia inject endotoxins into the bloodstream of test animals and humans, which has been shown to cause a rapid onset of insulin resistance — a key feature of metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes (29Trusted Source).

It also leads to an immediate increase in inflammatory markers, indicating that an inflammatory response has been activated (30Trusted Source).

Additionally, both animal and human research indicate that an unhealthy diet may cause elevated endotoxin levels.

Animal studies suggest that a long-term, high-fat diet may cause endotoxemia, as well as inflammation, insulin resistance, obesity, and metabolic disease as a result (26Trusted Source, 31Trusted Source, 32Trusted Source).

Similarly, in a 1-month human study in 8 healthy people, a typical Western diet lead to a 71% increase in blood endotoxin levels, while levels decreased by 31% in people on a low-fat diet (33Trusted Source).

Numerous other human studies also observed that endotoxin levels increased after an unhealthy meal including pure cream, as well as high-fat and moderate-fat meals (22Trusted Source, 34Trusted Source, 35Trusted Source, 36Trusted Source, 37Trusted Source).

Still, as most of the high-fat diets or meals also contained refined carbs and processed ingredients, these results should not be generalized to a healthy, high-fat, low-carb diet based on real foods and including plenty of fiber.

Some researchers believe that refined carbs increase endotoxin-producing bacteria, as well as gut permeability — amplifying endotoxin exposure (38Trusted Source).

A long-term study in monkeys on a diet high in refined fructose supports this hypothesis (39Trusted Source).

Gluten may also increase gut permeability due to its effects on the signaling molecule zonulin (40Trusted Source, 41).

The exact dietary causes of endotoxemia are currently unknown. In fact, multiple factors are likely at play — involving dietary components, the setup of your gut bacteria, and numerous other factors.

SUMMARY
Studies in both animals and humans show that an unhealthy diet can raise endotoxin levels in your blood — possibly driving metabolic disease.

The Bottom Line
Many chronic metabolic diseases are believed to begin in the gut, and long-term inflammation is thought to be a driving force.

Inflammation caused by bacterial endotoxins may be the missing link between an unhealthy diet, obesity, and chronic metabolic diseases.

Still, chronic inflammation is incredibly complex, and scientists are just beginning to explore how inflammation and diet may be connected.

It’s likely that the general healthfulness of your diet and lifestyle affects your risk of chronic inflammation and conditions linked to it, rather than a single dietary cause.

Thus, to keep yourself and your gut healthy, it’s best to focus on an overall healthy lifestyle with plenty of exercise, good sleep, and a diet based on real foods, plenty of prebiotic fiber, and few processed junk foods.

Share this article

Written by Kris Gunnars, BSc — Updated on February 27, 2019
HEALTHLINE NEWSLETTER
Master healthy eating with our Nutrition Edition
Join our Nutrition newsletter for honest insights, research updates, and tasty solutions to your food dilemmas 3 times a week. Ignite your passion for food that makes you feel good.

Enter your email
Your privacy is important to us





Was this article helpful?
Yes
No

Nutrition
How Your Gut Bacteria Can Influence Your Weight
Your body contains trillions of bacteria.

The majority of these bacteria are located in your intestines.

Gut bacteria play several important roles in your health, such as communicating with your immune system and producing certain vitamins.

Your gut bacteria can also affect how different foods are digested and produce chemicals that help make you feel full. As a result, they can affect your weight.

This article explains how your gut bacteria affect your weight and what foods promote healthy gut bacteria growth.

What Are Gut Bacteria?
Trillions of bacteria and microorganisms live on your skin and in your body (1Trusted Source, 2Trusted Source).

In fact, there are likely more bacterial cells in your body than human cells.

It is estimated that in a 154-pound (70-kg) man, there are around 40 trillion bacterial cells and only 30 trillion human cells (3Trusted Source).

Most of these bacteria live in a part of your large intestine called the cecum.

There are hundreds of different types of bacteria in your intestines. While some may cause disease, most of them carry out essential tasks to keep you healthy (4Trusted Source).

For example, your gut bacteria produce certain vitamins, including vitamin K, and communicate with your immune system to help your body fight off infection (5Trusted Source, 6Trusted Source).

They also influence how you digest certain foods and produce chemicals that help make you feel full. Therefore, your gut bacteria may influence your weight (7Trusted Source, 8Trusted Source).

Summary
Your body contains more bacterial cells than human cells. These bacteria are
primarily located in your intestines and carry out essential tasks to keep you
healthy.

They Affect How Your Food Is Digested
Since your gut bacteria line your intestines, they come into contact with the food you eat. This may affect what nutrients you absorb and how energy is stored in your body.

One study examined the gut bacteria in 77 pairs of twins, one of whom had obesity and one of whom did not.

The study found that those who had obesity had different gut bacteria than their twins without obesity. In particular, obesity was associated with lower gut bacteria diversity, meaning there were fewer types of bacteria in the gut (9Trusted Source).

Other studies have shown that if the gut bacteria from people with obesity are put into mice, the mice gain weight. This suggests that gut bacteria could affect weight (10Trusted Source, 11Trusted Source).

This may be due to the effect of bacteria on the digestion of different foods.

For example, humans can’t digest fiber but certain gut bacteria can. By digesting fiber, these gut bacteria produce a number of chemicals that benefit gut health and possibly promote weight loss (12Trusted Source).

For example, a number of studies have shown that people with high fiber intake have a lower weight, which may be due to the role that gut bacteria play in digesting fiber (13Trusted Source, 14Trusted Source, 15Trusted Source).

A recent study found that the ratio of two types of bacteria in your intestines may determine how much weight you lose when given a particular diet.

These two bacteria are Prevotella, which digests fiber and carbohydrates, and Bacteroidetes, which people who eat more animal protein and fat have more of (16Trusted Source).

In this study, 62 people were given a high-fiber, whole grain diet for 26 weeks. Those who had more Prevotella in their intestines lost 5.1 pounds (2.3 kg) more body fat than those with more Bacteroidetes in their intestines (17Trusted Source).

Your gut bacteria also digest certain antioxidants found in plants known as flavonoids, which may help prevent weight gain (18Trusted Source).

Finally, your gut bacteria can influence how dietary fats are absorbed in the intestines, which may affect how fat is stored in the body (19Trusted Source).

Summary
Your gut bacteria may affect your weight by influencing how different foods are
digested in your body. Dietary fiber is digested by certain species of gut
bacteria, which may aid weight loss.

They Affect Inflammation
Inflammation occurs when your body activates your immune system to fight infection.

It can also be caused by an unhealthy diet. For example, a diet containing too much fat, sugar or calories can lead to elevated inflammatory chemicals in the bloodstream and fat tissue, which may contribute to weight gain (20Trusted Source, 21Trusted Source).

Your gut bacteria play an important role in inflammation. Some species produce chemicals like lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which cause inflammation when they pass into the blood.

When mice are given LPS, they gain as much weight and have similar increases in blood sugar and insulin as mice fed a high-fat diet (22Trusted Source).

Therefore, certain gut bacteria that produce LPS and cause inflammation may contribute to weight gain and insulin resistance.

A study in 292 people found that those who were overweight had lower gut bacteria diversity and higher levels of C-reactive protein, an inflammatory marker in the blood (23Trusted Source).

However, some species of intestinal bacteria may reduce inflammation and prevent weight gain.

Bifidobacteriaand Akkermansia are beneficial species of bacteria that help maintain a healthy gut barrier and prevent inflammatory chemicals from passing from the gut into the bloodstream (24Trusted Source).

Studies in mice have found that Akkermansia can reduce weight gain and insulin resistance by reducing inflammation (25Trusted Source).

Similarly, when mice were fed prebiotic fibers to help increase Bifidobacteria in the gut, weight gain and insulin resistance decreased without affecting energy intake (26Trusted Source).

This is a relatively new area of research. Therefore, it is still not clear how gut bacteria affect inflammation and weight in humans.

Summary
Certain types of gut bacteria are essential for maintaining a healthy gut
barrier and preventing inflammation, which can contribute to weight gain.

They Produce Chemicals That Help You Feel Hungry or Full
Your body produces a number of different hormones that affect your appetite, including leptin, ghrelin, peptide YY (PYY).

Some studies have shown that different bacteria in the gut can affect how much of these hormones are produced and whether you feel hungry or full (27Trusted Source, 28Trusted Source).

Short-chain fatty acids are chemicals that are produced when certain species of gut bacteria break down fiber. One of these is known as propionate.

One study in 60 overweight adults found that taking propionate for 24 weeks significantly increased levels of the hormones PYY and GLP-1, both of which influence hunger.

People who took propionate also had reduced food intake and reduced weight gain (29Trusted Source).

Other studies have shown that prebiotics supplements, which contain compounds that are fermented by gut bacteria, can have a similar effect on appetite (30Trusted Source).

People who ate 16 grams of prebiotics per day for two weeks had higher levels of hydrogen in their breath. This indicates gut bacterial fermentation, less hunger and higher levels of the hormones GLP-1 and PYY, which make you feel full (31Trusted Source).

Summary Your
gut bacteria can produce chemicals that can help make you feel full. By
affecting your appetite, your gut bacteria may play a role in your weight.

The Best and Worst Foods for Your Gut Bacteria
A number of different foods are good for gut bacteria, including:

Whole grains: Whole
grains are grains that haven’t been refined. They’re high in fiber, which is digested by healthy gut bacteria like Bifidobacteria and may aid weight loss (32Trusted Source).
Fruits and vegetables: Fruits and vegetables contain many different fibers that are
good for gut bacteria. Eating an assortment of plant-based foods can improve
gut bacteria diversity, which is linked to a healthy weight (33Trusted Source).
Nuts and seeds: Nuts and seeds also contain lots of fiber and healthy
fats, which help support the growth of healthy bacteria in the gut (34Trusted Source).
Polyphenol-rich foods: These include dark chocolate, green tea and red wine.
The polyphenols in these foods can’t be digested alone but are broken
down by beneficial gut bacteria, promoting the growth of good bacteria (35Trusted Source).
Fermented foods: Fermented
foods include yogurt, kombucha, kefir and sauerkraut. They contain beneficial bacteria like lactobacilli and can minimize
other disease-causing bacteria in the intestines (36Trusted Source).
Probiotics: Probiotics aren’t necessary all of the time, but they can help
restore healthy gut bacteria after an illness or course of antibiotics and may
even aid weight loss (37Trusted Source).
On the other hand, eating some foods in excess may harm gut your bacteria, including:

Sugary foods: A diet
high in sugar can stimulate the growth of certain unhealthy bacteria in the gut,
which may contribute to weight gain and other chronic health disorders (38Trusted Source).
Artificial sweeteners: Artificial
sweeteners such as aspartame and saccharin reduce beneficial bacteria in the intestines, which may
contribute to high blood sugar (39Trusted Source).
Foods containing unhealthy fats: Healthy
fats such as omega-3s support beneficial bacteria in the intestines, whereas too many saturated fats may contribute to the
growth of disease-causing bacteria (40Trusted Source, 41Trusted Source).
Summary
Whole grains, fruits, vegetables and fermented foods all support healthy gut
bacteria, while too many sugary foods, artificial sweeteners and unhealthy fats
can be bad for your gut bacteria.

The Bottom Line
Your body contains trillions of bacteria that influence your health in many ways.

Your gut bacteria can affect how your food is digested, how fat is stored and whether you feel hungry or full.

Thus, a healthy gut bacteria may be important for maintaining a healthy weight.

High-fiber foods like whole grains, fruits, vegetables, nuts and seeds can all promote healthy gut bacteria.